
    Chancellor Palpatine: I don't know how much longer I can hold off the vote, my friends. More and more star systems are joining the Separatists.
    Mace Windu: If they do break away—
    Palpatine: I will not let this Republic that has stood for a thousand years be split in two! My negotiations will not fail.
    Windu: If they do, you must realize that there aren't enough Jedi to protect the Republic. We're keepers of the peace, not soldiers.
    Palpatine: Master Yoda, do you really think it will come to war?
    Yoda: Hmmm. The Dark Side clouds everything. Impossible to see, the future is.

    [Obi-Wan and Anakin look around a bar in Coruscant for assassin Zam Wesell]
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Why do I get the feeling you're going to be the death of me?
    Anakin Skywalker: Don't say that, master. You're the closest thing I have to a father.
    Kenobi: Then why don't you listen to me?
    Skywalker: I am trying.
    Kenobi: Do you see him?
    Skywalker: I think "he" is a she. And I think she's a changeling.
    Kenobi: Then we must be on our guard. Go and find her.
    Skywalker: Where are you going, Master?
    Kenobi: For a drink. [sits down at a counter]
    Barfly: You wanna buy some death sticks?
    Kenobi: [executes Jedi mind trick] You don't want to sell me death sticks.
    Barfly: I don't wanna sell you death sticks.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: You want to go home and rethink your life.
    Barfly: I wanna go home and rethink my life.

    Chancellor Palpatine: And so, they've finally given you an assignment. Your patience has paid off.
    Anakin Skywalker: Your guidance more than my patience.
    Palpatine: You don't need guidance, Anakin. In time, you will learn to trust your feelings. Then, you will be invincible. I have said it many times, you are the most gifted Jedi I have ever met.
    Skywalker: Thank you, Your Excellency.
    Palpatine: I see you becoming the greatest of all the Jedi, Anakin. Even more powerful than Master Yoda.

    Anakin Skywalker: From the moment I met you, all those years ago, not a day has gone by when I haven't thought of you. And now that I'm with you again... I'm in agony. The closer I get to you, the worse it gets. The thought of not being with you- I can't breathe. I'm haunted by the kiss that you should never have given me. My heart is beating... hoping that kiss will not become a scar. You are in my very soul, tormenting me... what can I do?- I will do anything you ask. If you are suffering as much as I am, please tell me.
    Padmé Amidala: I can't... We can't... It's not possible.
    Skywalker: Anything is possible, Padmé. Listen to me...
    Amidala: No, you listen! We live in a real world; come back to it. You're studying to become a Jedi, I'm... I'm a senator. If you follow your thoughts through to conclusion, they will take us to a place we cannot go, regardless of the way we feel about each other.
    Skywalker: Then you do feel something!
    Amidala: I will not let you give up your future for me.
    Skywalker: You're asking me to be rational. That is something that I know I cannot do. Believe me, I wish that I could just wish away my feelings, but I can't.
    Amidala: I will not give into this.
    Skywalker: Well, you know, it... it wouldn't have to be that way. We could keep it a secret.
    Amidala: We'd be living a lie, one that we couldn't keep, even if we wanted to. I couldn't do that. Could you, Anakin? Could you live like that?
    Skywalker: No. You're right. It would destroy us all.

    Obi-Wan Kenobi: [on hologram, from Kamino] I have successfully made contact with the Prime Minister of Kamino. They are using a bounty hunter named Jango Fett to create a clone army. I have a strong feeling that this bounty hunter is the assassin we're looking for.
    Mace Windu: Do you think these cloners are involved in the plot to assassinate Senator Amidala?
    Kenobi: No, Master, there appears to be no motive!
    Yoda: Do not assume anything, Obi-Wan. Clear, your mind must be, if you are to discover the real villains behind this plot.
    Kenobi: Yes, Master. They say that a Master Sifo-Dyas placed the order for a clone army at the request of the Senate, almost ten years ago. I was under the impression he was killed before that. Did the Council ever authorize the creation of a clone army?
    Windu: No. Whoever placed that order did not have the authorization of the Jedi Council.
    Yoda: Into custody, take this Jango Fett. Bring him here. Question him, we will.
    Kenobi: Yes, Master. I will report back if and when I have him. [hologram fades]
    Yoda: Blind we are, if the creation of this clone army we could not see.
    Windu: I think it is time we informed the Senate that our ability to use the Force has diminished.
    Yoda: Only the Dark Lords of the Sith know of our weakness. If informed, the Senate is, multiply, our adversaries will.

    Obi-Wan Kenobi: [in holograph recording, Anakin and Padme listen on Tatooine] Anakin, my long-range transmitter has been knocked out. Retransmit this message to Coruscant. [cuts to Palpatine and the Jedi council listening to the recording] I have tracked the bounty hunter Jango Fett to the droid foundries on Geonosis. The Trade Federation is to take delivery of a droid army here, and it is clear that Viceroy Gunray is behind the assassination attempts on Senator Amidala. The Commerce Guild and the Corporate Alliance have both pledged their armies to Count Dooku, and are forming a... Wait, wait. [ignites his lightsaber, blocks a few laser blasts, and a droideka appears as Obi-Wan is captured by Dooku's forces]
    Yoda: More happening on Geonosis, I fear, than has been revealed.
    Mace Windu: I agree. Anakin, we will deal with Count Dooku; the most important thing for you is to stay where you are. Protect the Senator at all costs. That is your first priority.
    Anakin Skywalker: Understood, Master.

    Bail Organa: The Commerce Guild and the Corporate Alliance are preparing for war. There can be no doubt of that.
    Chancellor Palpatine: Count Dooku must've made a treaty with them.
    Organa: We must stop them before they are ready.
    Palpatine: Master Yoda, how many Jedi are available to go to Geonosis?
    Yoda: Throughout the galaxy, thousands of Jedi, there are. To send on a special mission, only 200 are available.
    Organa: With all due respect for the Jedi Order, Master Yoda, that's not enough.
    Yoda: Through negotiation, the Jedi maintain peace. Starting a war, we have no intention of.
    Ask Aak: [in Huttese] The debate is over. Now we need that clone army.
    Organa: Unfortunately, the debate is not over. The Senate will never approve the use of clones before the Separatists attack.
    Mas Amedda: This is a crisis. The Senate must vote the Chancellor emergency powers. He can then approve the creation of an army.
    Palpatine: But what Senator would have the courage to propose such a radical amendment?
    Amedda: If only...Senator Amidala were here.

    [Count Dooku tries to recruit Obi-Wan into the Separatist cause]
    Count Dooku: It's a great pity that our paths have never crossed before, Obi-Wan. Qui-Gon always spoke very highly of you. I wish he were still alive. I could use his help right now.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Qui-Gon Jinn would never join you.
    Dooku: Don't be so sure, my young Jedi. You forget that he was once my apprentice, just as you were once his. He knew all about the corruptions of the Senate, but he would never have gone along with it if he had learned the truth as I have.
    Kenobi: The truth?
    Count Dooku: The truth. What if I told you that the Republic is now under the control of the Dark Lords of the Sith?
    Kenobi: No, that's not possible! The Jedi would be aware it!
    Dooku: The Dark Side of the Force has clouded their vision, my friend. Hundreds of senators are now under the influence of a Sith Lord called Darth Sidious.
    Kenobi: I don't believe you.
    Count Dooku: The Viceroy of the Trade Federation was once in league with this Darth Sidious, but he was betrayed ten years ago by the Dark Lord. He came to me for help; he told me everything. The Jedi Council wouldn't believe him. I've tried many times to warn them, but they wouldn't listen. By the time they sense the Dark Lord's presence, it would already be too late. You must join me, Obi-Wan, and together we will destroy the Sith!
    Kenobi: I will never join you, Dooku.
    Dooku: [coldly] It may be difficult to secure your release.

    [While chasing Count Dooku across the desert of Geonosis, Anakin insists on rescuing Padmé, who, after a hit to the ship they're on, falls out and onto the sand below]
    Anakin Skywalker: Padmé! [To pilot] Put the ship down!
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Anakin! Don't let your personal feelings get in the way! [to pilot] Follow that speeder.
    Skywalker: [To pilot] Lower the ship!
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: I can't take Dooku alone! I need you! If we catch him, we can end this war right now! We have a job to do!
    Skywalker: I don't care! [To pilot] Put the ship down!
    Kenobi: YOU WILL BE EXPELLED FROM THE JEDI ORDER!
    Skywalker: I CAN'T LEAVE HER!
    Kenobi: COME TO YOUR SENSES! What do you think Padmé would do were she in your position?
    Skywalker: [resigned] She would do her duty.

    Count Dooku: The Force is with us, Master Sidious.
    Darth Sidious: Welcome home, Lord Tyranus. You have done well.
    Dooku: I have good news for you, my lord. The war has begun.
    Sidious: Excellent. Everything is going as planned...

    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Do you believe what Count Dooku said about Sidious controlling the Senate? It doesn't feel right.
    Yoda: Joined the Dark Side, Dooku has. Lies, deceit, creating mistrust are his ways now.
    Mace Windu: Nevertheless, I think we should keep a closer eye on the Senate.
    Yoda: I agree.
    Windu: Where is your apprentice?
    Kenobi: On his way to Naboo, escorting Senator Amidala home. I must admit that without the clones, it would not have been victory.
    Yoda: Victory? Victory, you say? Master Obi-Wan, not victory. The shroud of the Dark Side has fallen. Begun, the Clone War has! 