
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Chancellor.
    Anakin Skywalker: Are you alright?
    Palpatine: Count Dooku.
    Obi-Wan: This time, we will do it together.
    Anakin: I was about to say that.
    Palpatine: Get help. You're no match for him, he's a Sith Lord.
    Obi-Wan: [turns and smiles] Chancellor Palpatine, Sith Lords are our speciality.
    Count Dooku: Your swords, please. We don't want to make a mess of things in front of the Chancellor.
    Obi-Wan: You won't get away this time, Dooku.
    Dooku: I've been looking forward to this.
    Anakin: My powers have doubled since the last time we met, Count.
    Dooku: Good. Twice the pride, double the fall.

    [Chancellor Palpatine and Anakin Skywalker talk about Skywalker's dreams]
    Palpatine: Did you ever hear the Tragedy of Darth Plagueis the Wise?
    Anakin: No.
    Palpatine: I thought not. It's not a story the Jedi would tell you. It's a Sith legend. Darth Plagueis was a Dark Lord of the Sith so powerful and so wise, he could use the Force to influence the midi-chlorians to create...life. He had such a knowledge of the Dark Side, he could even keep the ones he cared about...from dying.
    Anakin: He could actually...save people from death?
    Palpatine: The dark side of the Force is a pathway to many abilities some consider to be unnatural.
    Anakin: What happened to him?
    Palpatine: He became so powerful, the only thing he was afraid of was losing his power...which, eventually of course, he did. Unfortunately, he taught his apprentice everything he knew. Then his apprentice killed him in his sleep. Plagueis never saw it coming. Ironic. He could save others from death...but not himself.
    Anakin: Is it possible to learn this power?
    Palpatine: Not from a Jedi.

    [Anakin stops Mace Windu from hurting the Chancellor, severing Windu's hand. Palpatine drops his act and again strikes Windu with force-lightning]
    Chancellor Palpatine/Darth Sidious: [Triumphantly] POWER! UNLIMITED... POWER! [sends Windu flying out the window to his death]
    Anakin Skywalker: [Horrified] What have I done...?!
    Sidious: You're fulfilling your destiny, Anakin. Become my apprentice. Learn to use the Dark Side of the Force.
    Anakin: [exhausted] ... I will do whatever you ask.
    Sidious: Good!
    Anakin: Just help me save Padmé's life. I can't live without her.
    Sidious: To cheat death is the power only one has achieved, but if we work together...I know we can discover the secret.
    Anakin: I pledge myself...to your teachings...to the ways of the Sith.
    Sidious: Good. Good. ... The Force is strong with you! A powerful Sith, you will become! Anakin Skywalker, you are one with the Order of the Sith Lords. Henceforth, you shall be known as Darth... Vader.
    Darth Vader: Thank you, my master.
    Sidious: Rise.

    Darth Sidious: Because the Council did not trust you, my young apprentice, I believe you are the only Jedi with no knowledge of this plot. When the Jedi learn what has transpired here, they will kill us...along with all the senators.
    Darth Vader: I agree. The Council's next move will be against the Senate.
    Sidious: Every single Jedi, including your friend, Obi-Wan Kenobi, is now an enemy of the Republic.
    Vader: I understand, Master.
    Sidious: We must move quickly. The Jedi are relentless. If they are not all destroyed, it will be civil war without end. First, I want you to go to the Jedi Temple. We will catch them off balance. Do what must be done, Lord Vader. Do not hesitate. Show no mercy. Only then will you be strong enough with the Dark Side to save Padmé.
    Vader: What about the other Jedi spread across the galaxy?
    Sidious: Their betrayal will be dealt with. After you have killed all the Jedi in the Temple, go to the Mustafar system. Wipe out Viceroy Gunray and the other Separatist leaders. Once more the Sith will rule the galaxy! And...we shall have...peace.

    Palpatine: The war is over. The Separatists have been eliminated. And the Jedi rebellion has been foiled. We stand of the threshold of a new beginning.
    Bail Organa: What's happened?
    Padmé Amidala: The Chancellor has been elaborating on a plot by the Jedi to overthrow the Senate.
    Palpatine: The remaining Jedi will be hunted down and defeated! Any collaborators will suffer the same fate! These have been trying times, but we have passed the test. The attempt on my life has left me scarred and deformed. But, I assure you, my resolve has never been stronger! In order to ensure our security and continuing stability, the Republic will be reorganized into the First Galactic Empire...for a safe and secure society!
    Padmé: So this is how liberty dies...with thunderous applause.

    [After the massacre at the Jedi temple]
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: I've recalibrated the code, warning all surviving Jedi to stay away.
    Yoda: For the clones, to discover the recalibration, a long time, it will take. And to change it back, longer, still.
    Obi-Wan: Wait, Master. There is something I must know. [inspects a security hologram]
    Yoda: You realize, of course, that if into the security recordings, you go, only pain, will you find.
    Obi-Wan: I must know the truth, Master. [watches hologram of Anakin/Vader killing Jedi younglings and pledging allegiance to Palpatine; Horrified] It can't be. It can't be!

        Palpatine: [On hologram] You have done well, my new apprentice. Your skills are unmatched by any Sith before you. Now, Lord Vader, go and bring peace to the Empire.

    Obi-Wan: I can't watch anymore. [deactivates hologram]
    Yoda: Destroy the Sith, we must.
    Obi-Wan: Send me to kill the Emperor. I will not kill Anakin.
    Yoda: To fight this Lord Sidious, strong enough, you are not.
    Obi-Wan: But Anakin...he is like my brother. I cannot do it.
    Yoda: Twisted by the dark side, young Skywalker has become. The boy you trained, gone, he is, consumed by Darth Vader.
    Obi-Wan: I do not know where the Emperor has sent him. I don't know where to look.
    Yoda: Use your feelings, Obi-Wan, and find him, you will. Pay the Emperor a visit, I must.

    [Padmé has just arrived on Mustafar, has confronted Anakin Skywalker and they embrace]
    Anakin Skywalker: I saw your ship. What are you doing out here?
    Padmé Amidala: I was so worried about you. Obi-Wan told me terrible things.
    Anakin: What things?
    Padmé: He said...that you turned to the Dark Side...that you...killed younglings...
    Anakin: Obi-Wan is trying to turn you against me.
    Padmé: He cares about us.
    Anakin: Us?
    Padmé: He knows. He wants to help you. Anakin, all I want is your love.
    Anakin: Love won't save you, Padmé. Only my new powers can do that.
    Padmé: But at what cost? You're a good person! Don't do this!
    Anakin: I won't lose you the way I lost my mother. I am becoming more powerful than any Jedi has ever dreamed of, and I'm doing it for you. To protect you.
    Padmé: Come away with me. Help me raise our child. Leave everything else behind while we still can!
    Anakin: Don't you see? We don't have to run away anymore! I have brought peace to the Republic. I am more powerful than the Chancellor, I... I can overthrow him! And together, you and I can rule the galaxy; make things the way we want them to be! You don't believe me, do you?
    [Padmé slowly backs away from Anakin, shocked]
    Padmé: [shocked] I don't believe what I'm hearing! Obi-Wan was right... you've changed!
    Anakin: [angry] I don't want to hear any more about Obi-Wan. The Jedi turned against me. The Republic turned against me. Don't you turn against me!
    Padmé: [crying] I don't know you anymore! Anakin...you're breaking my heart! You're going down a path I cannot follow!
    Anakin: [confused] Because of Obi-Wan?
    Padmé: Because of what you've done! What you plan to do! [pleading desperately] Stop! Stop now... come back! I love you!
    Anakin: [Enraged and paranoid at seeing Obi-Wan in the main hatchway of her cruiser] LIAR!
    Padmé: [looks back and sees Obi-Wan, then turns back to Anakin; horrified] NO!
    Anakin: You're with him! You brought him here to kill me!! [begins to Force-choke Padmé]
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Let her go, Anakin!
    Padmé: [struggling to breathe] Anakin...
    Obi-Wan: Let... her... go.
    [Anakin releases Padmé; she collapses into unconsciousness]

    [Vader has just choked Padmé into unconsciousness]
    Darth Vader: You've turned her against me!
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: You have done that yourself!
    Vader: YOU WILL NOT TAKE HER FROM ME!
    Obi-Wan: You anger and your lust for power have already done that. You have allowed this Dark Lord to twist your mind, until now...until now you have become the very thing you swore to destroy.
    Vader: Don't lecture me, Obi-Wan! I see through the lies of the Jedi! I do not fear the Dark Side as you do! I have brought peace, freedom, justice, and security to my new Empire!
    Obi-Wan: [incredulously] Your new Empire?
    Vader: Don't make me kill you.
    Obi-Wan: Anakin, my allegiance is to the Republic! To democracy!!
    Vader: If you're not with me, then you're my enemy!
    Obi-Wan: Only a Sith deals in absolutes. I will do what I must.
    Vader: You will try.
    [They duel]

    [Obi-Wan Kenobi has cut off Vader's legs and part of his remaining good arm on one of Mustafar's higher grounds. Vader is struggling near the lava river]
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: [anguished] You were the Chosen One! It was said that you would destroy the Sith, not join them! Bring balance to the Force, not leave it in darkness! [picks up Anakin Skywalker's lightsaber]
    Darth Vader: I HATE YOU!!!
    Obi-Wan: You were my brother, Anakin! I loved you.
    [Vader, now too close to the lava river, catches on fire. Obi-Wan leaves]

    [Darth Vader is now a cyborg with prosthetic legs and arms, fully clothed in black armor with respirator mask. The operating table he is on has risen to vertical position]
    Palpatine: Lord Vader, can you hear me?
    Darth Vader: [In mechanical voice] Yes, Master. Where is Padmé? Is she safe? Is she alright?
    Palpatine: It seems, in your anger, you killed her.
    Darth Vader: I... I couldn't have. She was alive! I felt it! [damages several surrounding objects and droids through the Force. He then breaks the clamps that have been holding him down and takes a few steps forward. Palpatine watches, grinning cruelly.] NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!!!!!

[After Padmè's death, Yoda, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Senator Bail Organa are onboard the Tantive IV and are traveling to Naboo while discussing the babies' future]

    Yoda: Hmm... Hidden, safe, the children must be kept.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: We must take them to a place where the Sith will not sense their presence.
    Yoda: Hmm... Split up, they should be.
    Senator Bail Organa: My wife and I will take the girl. We've always talked about adopting a baby girl. She will be loved with us.
    Obi-Wan: And what of the boy?
    Yoda: To Tatooine. To his family, send him.
    Obi-Wan: I will take the child and watch over him.
    Yoda: Until the time is right, disappear we will. [Senator Organa and Obi-Wan bow and start to leave] Master Kenobi, wait a moment. In your solitude on Tatooine, training I have for you.
    Obi-wan: Training?
    Yoda: An old friend has learned the path to immortality. One who has returned from the netherworld of the Force... Your old master.
    Obi-Wan: [surprised] Qui-Gon?!
    Yoda: How to commune with him, I will teach you. 