
    [Luke is stranded out in a harsh snowstorm.]
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: [voice comes out of nowhere] Luke. Luke!
    Luke Skywalker: [weakly] Ben?
    Kenobi: You will go to the Dagobah system.
    Skywalker: Dagobah system?
    Kenobi: There you will learn from Yoda, the Jedi Master who instructed me.

    [Aboard the Super Star Destroyer Executor, Captain Firmus Piett reports to Admiral Kendal Ozzel.]
    Captain Piett: Admiral!
    Admiral Ozzel: Yes, Captain?
    Piett: I think we've got something, sir. The report is only a fragment, from a probe droid in the Hoth system, but it's the best lead we've had.
    Ozzel: [growing impatient] We have thousands of probe droids searching the galaxy. I want proof, not leads!
    Piett: The visuals indicate life readings.
    Ozzel: Ridiculous!! It could mean anything! If we followed up every lead...
    Piett: But sir, the Hoth system is supposed to be devoid of human forms.
    Darth Vader: [approaching the two officers after hearing their conversation] You've found something?
    Piett: Yes, my lord. [shows Vader the location of the power generator on Hoth]
    Vader: That's it. The Rebels are there.
    Ozzel: [annoyed] My lord, there are so many uncharted settlements. It could be smugglers; it could be pirates; it could be...
    Vader: That is the system! The Force tells me so. The Rebels are there...and I am sure Skywalker is with them. Set your course for the Hoth system!! [turns to General Maximilian Veers] General Veers, prepare your men!!

    [Darth Vader emerges from an egg-like meditation chamber to receive a report from General Maximilian Veers.]
    Darth Vader: What is it, General?
    General Veers: My Lord, the fleet has moved out of lightspeed. Com-Scan has detected an energy field protecting an area of the sixth planet of the Hoth system. The field is strong enough to deflect any bombardment.
    Vader: [Angrily] The Rebels are alerted to our presence. Admiral Ozzel came out of lightspeed too close to the system.
    Veers: He felt surprise was wiser—
    Vader: He is as clumsy as he is stupid. A clean bombardment is now impossible. General, prepare your troops for a surface attack.
    Veers: Yes, my Lord. [bows and leaves quickly]
    [Vader turns to a nearby screen and calls up Admiral Kendal Ozzel and Captain Firmus Piett.]
    Admiral Ozzel: Lord Vader, the fleet has moved out of lightspeed and we're preparing to— [begins choking]
    Vader: You have failed me for the last time, Admiral. Captain Piett.
    Captain Piett: [nervously] Yes, my lord.
    Vader: Make ready to land our troops beyond their energy field, then deploy the fleet so that nothing gets off the system. You are in command now, Admiral Piett.
    Piett: [sees a dead Ozzel collapse] Thank you, Lord Vader. I won't fail you.

    Darth Vader: [kneeling before Emperor Palpatine's hologram] What is thy bidding, my master?
    Emperor Palpatine: There is a great disturbance in the Force.
    Vader: I have felt it.
    Palpatine: We have a new enemy. The young Rebel who destroyed the Death Star. I have no doubt this boy is the offspring of Anakin Skywalker.
    Vader: How is that possible?
    Palpatine: Search your feelings, Lord Vader. You will know it to be true. He could destroy us.
    Vader: He's just a boy. Obi-Wan can no longer help him.
    Palpatine: The Force is strong with him. The son of Skywalker must not become a Jedi.
    Vader: If he could be turned, he would become a powerful ally.
    Palpatine: [intrigued] Yes... He would be a great asset. Can it be done?
    Vader: He will join us or die, master.

    [Aboard the Super Star Destroyer Executor, Darth Vader gives the bounty hunters instructions.]
    Darth Vader: There will be a substantial reward for the one who finds the Millennium Falcon. You are free to use any methods neccesary, but I want them alive. [turns to Boba Fett] No disintegrations!
    Boba Fett: As you wish.

    Yoda: Luke! You must complete the training.
    Luke Skywalker: I can't keep the vision out of my head. They're my friends. I've gotta help them.
    Yoda: You must not go!
    Luke: But Han and Leia will die if I don't.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: You don't know that. [appears in spirit] Even Yoda cannot see their fate.
    Luke: But I can help them! I feel the Force!
    Obi-Wan: But you cannot control it! This is a dangerous time for you, when you will be tempted by the Dark Side of the Force.
    Yoda: Yes, yes! To Obi-Wan you listen. The cave! Remember your failure at the cave!
    Luke: But I've learned so much since then. Master Yoda, I promise to return and finish what I've begun. You have my word.
    Obi-Wan: It is you and your abilities the Emperor wants. That is why your friends are made to suffer.
    Luke: That's why I have to go.
    Obi-Wan: Luke, I don't want to lose you to the Emperor the way I lost Vader.
    Luke: You won't.
    Yoda: Stopped they must be. On this all depends. Only a fully trained Jedi Knight with the Force as his ally will conquer Vader and his Emperor. If you end your training now, if you choose the quick and easy path as Vader did, you will become an agent of evil.
    Obi-Wan: Patience!
    Luke: And sacrifice Han and Leia?
    Yoda: If you honor what they fight for, yes!
    Obi-Wan: If you choose to face Vader, you will do it alone. I cannot interfere.
    Luke: I understand. R2, fire up the converters.
    Obi-Wan: Luke. Don't give in to hate. That leads to the Dark Side.
    Yoda: Strong is Vader. Mind what you have learned. Save you it can.
    Luke: I will and I'll return. I promise. [flies off with X-Wing]
    Yoda: Told you I did. Reckless is he. Now matters are worse.
    Obi-Wan: That boy is our last hope.
    Yoda: No. There is another.

    Darth Vader: You may take Captain Solo to Jabba the Hutt after I have Skywalker.
    Boba Fett: He's no good to me dead.
    Vader: He will not be permanently damaged.
    Lando Calrissian: Lord Vader, what about Leia and the Wookiee?
    Vader: They must never again leave this city.
    Calrissian: [angry] That was never a condition of our agreement, nor was giving Han to this bounty hunter!
    Vader: Perhaps you think you're being treated unfairly?
    Calrissian: [pauses] No.
    Vader: Good. It would be unfortunate if I have to leave a garrison here.
    Calrissian: [under his breath] This deal is getting worse all the time.

    [Han kisses Leia and is taken by stormtroopers to the carbon-freezing chamber.]
    Princess Leia Organa: I love you.
    Han Solo: I know.

    [Vader has just cut off Luke's right hand, which has his lightsaber]
    Darth Vader: There is no escape! Don't make me destroy you. Luke, you do not yet realize your importance. You've only begun to discover your power! Join me, and I will complete your training! With our combined strength, we can end this destructive conflict, and bring order to the galaxy.
    Luke Skywalker: [angrily] I'll never join you!
    Vader: If only you knew the power of the Dark Side. Obi-Wan never told you what happened to your father.
    Skywalker: He told me enough! He told me you killed him!
    Vader: No, I am your father.
    Skywalker: [shocked] No. No! That's not true! That's impossible!
    Vader: Search your feelings, you know it to be true!
    Skywalker: NOOOOOOO! NOOOOOOOO!!!
    Vader: Luke, you can destroy the Emperor. He has foreseen this. It is your destiny! Join me, and together, we can rule the galaxy as father and son! Come with me. It is the only way.
    [Luke lets go of the projection and falls into the shaft]

    Lando Calrissian: Luke, we're ready for take off.
    Luke Skywalker: Good luck, Lando.
    Calrissian: When we find Jabba the Hutt and that bounty hunter, we'll contact you.
    Skywalker: I'll meet you at the rendezvous point on Tatooine.
    Calrissian: [to Leia] Princess, we'll find Han. I promise.
    Skywalker: Chewie, I'll be looking for your signal. Take care you two and may the Force be with you. 