
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: I have a bad feeling about this.
    Qui-Gon Jinn: I don't sense anything.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: It's not about the mission, Master. It's something... elsewhere. Elusive.
    Qui-Gon Jinn: Don't center on your anxieties, Obi-Wan. Keep your concentration here and now, where it belongs.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: But Master Yoda says I should be mindful of the future.
    Qui-Gon Jinn: But not at the expense of the moment. Be mindful of the living Force, young Padawan.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Yes, Master. How do you think this Trade Viceroy will deal with the Chancellor's demands?
    Qui-Gon Jinn: These Federation types are cowards. The negotiations will be short.

    Darth Sidious: What is it?
    Daultay Dofine: [interrupts] This scheme of yours has failed, Lord Sidious. The blockade is finished. We dare not go against the Jedi.
    Sidious: Viceroy, I don't want this stunted slime in my sight again. [Daultay leaves] This turn of events is unfortunate. We must accelerate our plans. Begin landing your troops.
    Nute Gunray: My lord! Is that... legal?
    Sidious: I will make it legal.
    Gunray: And the Jedi?
    Sidious: The Chancellor should never have brought them into this! Kill them immediately!
    Gunray: Yes...yes, my lord. As you wish.

    Qui-Gon Jinn: Do you hear that?
    [a rumbling is heard in the distance]
    Jar Jar Binks: Yeah.
    Qui-Gon Jinn: That is the sound of a thousand terrible things headed this way.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: If and when they find us, they will crush us, grind us into tiny pieces and blast us into oblivion!
    Jar Jar Binks: Hmmm... yousa point is well seen. This way. Hurry!

    Ric Olie: There's not enough power to get us to Coruscant...the hyperdrive is leaking.
    Qui-Gon Jinn: We'll have to land somewhere to refuel and repair the ship.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: [sudying a map] Here, Master. Tatooine. It's small, out of the way, poor... The Trade Federation has no presence there.
    Panaka: How can you be sure?
    Qui-Gon: It's controlled by the Hutts.
    Panaka: [alarmed] You can't take Her Royal Highness there! The Hutts are gangsters! If they discovered her...
    Qui-Gon: ... It would be no different than if we landed on a system controlled by the Federation. Except the Hutts aren't looking for her, which gives us an advantage.

    Darth Sidious: And Queen Amidala...has she signed the treaty?
    Nute Gunray: She has disappeared, my lord. One Naboo cruiser got past the blockade.
    Sidious: [annoyed] Viceroy, find her! I want that treaty signed!
    Gunray: My lord...it's impossible to locate the ship! It's out of our range!
    Sidious: Not for a Sith. [hologram of Darth Maul appears in front of Viceroy Gunray] This is my apprentice, Darth Maul. He will find your lost ship. [holograms of Sidious and Maul fade]
    Gunray: This is getting out of hand. Now there are two of them!!
    Rune Haako: We should not have made this bargain.

    Watto: ...Here it is...a T-14 hyperdrive generator!! Thee in luck, I'm the only one hereabouts who has one...but thee might as well buy a new ship. It would be cheaper, I think...Saying of which, how's thee going to pay for all this?
    Qui-Gon: I have 20,000 republic dataries...
    Watto: Republic credits? Republic credits are no use out here. I need something different, something more real...
    Qui-Gon: I don't have anything else, but credits will do fine.
    Watto: No, they won'ta.
    Qui-Gon: Credits will do fine.
    Watto: No, they won'ta! What, you think you're some kind of Jedi, waving your hand around like that? I'm a Toydarian. Mind tricks won't work on me; only money. No money! No parts! No deal! And no one else has a T-14 hyperdrive, I promise you that.

    Darth Maul: Tatooine is sparsely populated. If the trace was correct, I will find them quickly, Master.
    Darth Sidious: Move against the Jedi first. You will then have no difficulty taking the Queen back to Naboo to sign the treaty.
    Darth Maul: At last we will reveal ourselves to the Jedi. At last we will have revenge.
    Darth Sidious: You have been well trained, my young apprentice. They will be no match for you.

    Finis Valorum: The chair recognizes the Senator from the sovereign system of Naboo.
    Palpatine: Supreme Chancellor, delegates of the Senate, a tragedy has occurred... which started right here with the taxation of trade routes... and has now engulfed our entire planet... in the oppression of the Trade Federation.
    Lott Dod: This is outrageous! I object to the senator's statements!
    Valorum: The chair does not recognize the senator from the Trade Federation at this time.
    Palpatine: To state our allegations, I present Queen Amidala, recently elected ruler of the Naboo, who speaks on our behalf.
    Padmé Amidala: Honorable representatives of the Republic, I come to you under the gravest of circumstances. The Naboo system has been invaded by the droid armies of the Trade...
    Dod: I object! There is no proof! This is incredible. We recommend a commission be sent to Naboo to ascertain the truth.
    Valorum: Recommendation denied.
    Dod: Your honor, you cannot condemn us without reasonable observation. It's against all the rules of procedure!
    Senator Teem: The Congress of Malastare concurs with the honorable delegate from the Trade Federation. A commission must be appointed.
    Valorum: The point...
    Mas Amedda: Excuse me, Chancellor. [whispers to Chancellor Valorum]
    Palpatine: [Whispering to Queen Amidala] Enter the bureaucrats, the true rulers of the Republic. And on the payroll of the Trade Federation, I might add. This is where Chancellor Valorum's strength will disappear.
    Valorum: The point is conceded. Section 523A takes precedence here. Queen Amidala of the Naboo, will you defer your motion to allow a commission to explore the validity of your accusations?
    Padmé: I will not defer. I've come before you to resolve this attack on our sovereignty now! I was not elected to watch my people suffer and die while you discuss this invasion in a committee! If this body is not capable of action, I suggest new leadership is needed. I move for a vote of no confidence in Chancellor Valorum's leadership.
    [The Senators become outraged by Queen Amidala's decision]
    Mas Amedda: ORDER!!
    Palpatine: Now they will elect a new Chancellor, a strong Chancellor. One who will not let this tragedy continue.

    Qui-Gon Jinn: [dying] It's too late, it's...
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: No!
    Qui-Gon Jinn: Obi-Wan, promise... Promise me you will train the boy.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Yes, master.
    Qui-Gon Jinn: He... is the Chosen One. He... will bring balance... Train him.

    Yoda: Confer on you the level of Jedi Knight, the Council does. But agree with your taking this boy as your Padawan learner, I do not!
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Qui-Gon believed in him.
    Yoda: The Chosen One, the boy may be. Nevertheless, grave danger, I fear in his training.
    Obi-Wan Kenobi: Master Yoda, I gave Qui-Gon my word. I will train Anakin... without the approval of the Council, if I must.
    Yoda: Qui-Gon's defiance, I sense in you. Need that, you do not. Agree with you, the Council does. Your apprentice, Skywalker will be.

    [After Darth Maul's defeat]
    Mace Windu: There's no doubt. The mysterious warrior was a Sith.
    Yoda: Always two, there are. No more, no less. A master... and an apprentice.
    Mace Windu: But which one was destroyed? The master or the apprentice?

