Release Date : July 1 , 2005 [ EBook # 16169 ]
Character set encoding : UTF-8*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIDO QUEENE OF CARTHAGE ***Produced by Clare Boothby , Clare Elliott and the OnlineDistributed Proofreading Team at http : //www.pgdp.netThe Tudor Facsimile TextsThe Tragedy ofDido Queen of CarthageWritten byCHRISTOPHER MARLOWE and THOMAS NASH1594
1594 [ Bodleian ]
1914The Tudor Facsimile Texts
JOHN S. FARMERThe Tragedy ofDido Queen of CarthageWritten byCHRISTOPHER MARLOWE and THOMAS NASH1594
THE TUDOR FACSIMILE TEXTSMCMXIVThe Tragedy ofDido Queen of CarthageWritten by CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE and THOMAS NASH1594
Other examples ( says Sir Sidney Lee , but unrecorded by Greg ) are at BridgewaterHouse and at Chatsworth ; the Devonshire Collection of Plays hasrecently been disposed of to an American collector .
I haveincluded in this facsimile the page of manuscript in the Bodleyexample inasmuch as it contains matter of interest to thestudent.The reproduction from the original was made by The ClarendonPress , Oxford .
`` Bib. Britan. 1740.I suspect M^r Warton had no other authority than this for sayingthat this play was left imperfect by Marlowe , and completed +published by Nashe ; for it does not appear from the title pagethat it was not written in conjunction by him + Marlowe in thelifetime of the former. Perhaps Nashe 's Elegy might ascertainthis point. Tanner had , I believe , no authority but Philipses , for calling Marlowe an actor.There was an old Latin play on the subject of Dido , written byJohn Rightwise and played before Cardinal Wolsey + again beforeQueen Elizabeth in 1564. There is also another Latin play on thissubject Dido , tragedia nova so quatuor pri*ibus ******************* Virgilii disampla Antwerp ed , 1559.THETragedie of Dido
Played by the Children of her
Written by Christopher Marlowe , and
Actors
Ascanius .
Dido .
Anna .
Achates .
Ilioneus .
Iarbas .
Cloanthes .
Sergestus. [ Illustration : ( Decorative ) `` BY PEACE PLENTY , BY WISDOME PEACE '' ] AT LONDON , Printed , by the Widdowe Orwin , for Thomas Woodcocke , andare to be solde at his shop , in Paules Church-yeard , atthe signe of the blacke Beare. 1594. [ Illustration : ( Decorative ) ] The Tragedie of Dido Queene
Iupiter dandlingGanimed upon his knee , and Mercury lying asleepe .
Come gentle Ganimed and play with me , I loue thee well , say Iuno what she will .
I am much better for your worthles loue , That will not shield me from her shrewith blowes : To day when as I fild into your cups , And held the cloath of pleasance whiles you dranke , She reacht me such a rap for that I spilde , As made the bloud run downe about mine eares .
What ? dares she strike the darling of my thoughts ? By Saturnes soule , and this earth threatning aire , That shaken thrise , makes Natures buildings quake , I vow , if she but once frowne on thee more , To hang her meteor like twixt heauen and earth , And bind her hand and foote with golden cordes , As once I did for harming Hercules .
Might I but see that pretie sport a foote , O how would I with Helens brother laugh , And bring the Gods to wonder at the game : Sweet Iupiter , if ere I pleasde thine eye , Or seemed faire walde in with Egles wings , Grace my immortall beautie with this boone , And I will spend my time in thy bright armes .
What ist sweet wagge I should deny thy youth ? Whose face reflects such pleasure to mine eyes , As I exhal 'd with thy fire darting beames , Haue oft driuen backe the horses of the night.When as they would haue hal 'd thee from my sight : Sit on my knee , and call for thy content , Controule proud Fate , and cut the thred of time , Why are not all the Gods at thy commaund , And heauen and earth the bounds of thy delight ?
shall daunce to make thee laughing sport , And my nine Daughters sing when thou art sad , From Iunos bird Ile pluck her spotted pride , To make thee fannes wherewith to coole thy face , And Venus Swannes shall shed their siluer downe , To sweeten out the slumbers of thy bed:
no more shall shew the world his wings , If that thy fancie in his feathers dwell , But as this one Ile teare them all from him , Doe thou but say their colour pleaseth me : Hold here my little loue these linked gems , My Iuno ware vpon her marriage day , Put thou about thy necke my owne sweet heart , And tricke thy armes and shoulders with my theft .
I would haue a iewell for mine eare , And a fine brouch to put in my hat , And then Ile hugge with you an hundred times .
And shall haue Ganimed , if thou wilt be my loue .
I this is it , you can sit toying there , And playing with that female wanton boy , Whiles my Æneas wanders on the Seas , And rests a pray to euery billowes pride .
, false Iuno in her Chariots pompe , Drawne through the heauens by Steedes of Boreas brood , Made Hebe to direct her ayrie wheelesInto the windie countrie of the clowdes , Where finding Æolus intrencht with stormes , And guarded with a thousand grislie ghosts , She humbly did beseech him for our bane , And charg 'd him drowne my sonne with all his traine.Then gan the windes breake ope their brazen doores , And all Æolia to be vp in armes : Poore Troy must now be sackt vpon the Sea , And Neptunes waues be enuious men of warre,
horse to Ætnas hill transformd , Prepared stands to wracke their woodden walles , And Æolus like Agamemnon soundsThe surges , his fierce souldiers to the spoyle : See how the night Ulysses-like comes forth , And intercepts the day as Dolon erst : Ay me ! the Starres supprisde like Rhesus Steedes , Are drawne by darknes forth Astræus tents.What shall I doe to saue thee my sweet boy ? When as the waues doe threat our Chrystall world , And Proteus raising hils of flouds on high , Entends ere long to sport him in the skie.False Iupiter , rewardst thou vertue so ? What ? is not pietie exempt from woe ? Then dye Æneas in thine innocence , Since that religion hath no recompence .
How may I credite these thy flattering termes , When yet both sea and sands beset their ships , And Phœbus as in stygian pooles , refrainesTo taint his tresses in the Tyrrhen maine ?
I will take order for that presently:
awake , and haste to Neptunes realme , Whereas the Wind-god warring now with Fate , Besiege the ofspring of our kingly loynes , Charge him from me to turne his stormie powers , And fetter them in Vulcans sturdie brasse , That durst thus proudly wrong our kinsmans peace .
farewell , thy sonne shall be our care : Come Ganimed , we must about this geare .
Disquiet Seas lay downe your swelling lookes , And court Æneas with your calmie cheere , Whose beautious burden well might make you proude , Had not the heauens conceau 'd with hel-borne clowdes , Vaild his resplendant glorie from your view , For my sake pitie him Oceanus , That erst-while issued from thy watrie loynes , And had my being from thy bubling froth:
I know hath fild his trumpe with Troy , And therefore will take pitie on his toyle , And call both Thetis and Cimodoæ , To succour him in this extremitie .
What ? doe I see my sonne now come on shoare:
, how art thou compast with content , The while thine eyes attract their sought for ioyes : Great Iupiter , still honourd maist thou be , For this so friendly ayde in time of neede.Here in this bush disguised will I stand , Whiles my Æneas spends himselfe in plaints , And heauen and earth with his vnrest acquaints .
You sonnes of care , companions of my course,
misfortune followes vs by sea , And Helens rape doth haunt thee at the heeles.How many dangers haue we ouer past ? Both barking Scilla , and the sounding Rocks , The Cyclops shelues , and grim Ceranias seateHaue you oregone , and yet remaine aliue ! Pluck vp your hearts , since fate still rests our friend , And chaunging heauens may those good daies returne , Which Pergama did vaunt in all her pride .
Braue Prince of Troy , thou onely art our God , That by thy vertues freest vs from annoy , And makes our hopes suruiue to cunning ioyes : Doe thou but smile , and clowdie heauen will cleare , Whose night and day descendeth from thy browes : Though we be now in extreame miserie , And rest the map of weatherbeaten woe : Yet shall the aged Sunne shed forth his aire , To make vs liue vnto our former heate , And euery beast the forrest doth send forth , Bequeath her young ones to our scanted foode .
Father I faint , good father giue me meate .
Alas sweet boy , thou must be still a while , Till we haue fire to dresse the meate we kild : Gentle Achates , reach the Tinder boxe , That we may make a fire to warme vs with , And rost our new found victuals on this shoare .
See what strange arts necessitie findes out , How neere my sweet Æneas art thou driuen ?
Hold , take this candle and goe light a fire , You shall haue leaues and windfall bowes enowNeere to these woods , to rost your meate withall:
, goe and drie thy drenched lims , Whiles I with my Achates roaue abroad , To know what coast the winde hath driuen vs on , Or whether men or beasts inhabite it .
The ayre is pleasant , and the soyle most fitFor Cities , and societies supports : Yet much I maruell that I can not finde , No steps of men imprinted in the earth .
Now is the time for me to play my part : Hoe yong men , saw you as you cameAny of all my Sisters wandring here ? Hauing a quiuer girded to her side , And cloathed in a spotted Leopards skin .
I neither saw nor heard of any such : But what may I faire Virgin call your name ? Whose lookes set forth no mortall forme to view , Nor speech bewraies ought humaine in thy birth , Thou art a Goddesse that delud'st our eyes , And shrowdes thy beautie in this borrowd shape ; But whether thou the Sunnes bright Sister be , Or one of chast Dianas fellow Nimphs , Liue happie in the height of all content , And lighten our extreames with this one boone , As to instruct us vnder what good heauenWe breathe as now , and what this world is calde , On which by tempests furie we are cast , Tell vs , O tell vs that are ignorant , And this right hand shall make thy Altars crackWith mountaine heapes of milke white Sacrifize .
Such honour , stranger , doe I not affect : It is the vse for Turen maides to weareTheir bowe and quiuer in this modest sort , And suite themselues in purple for the nonce , That they may trip more lightly ore the lawndes , And ouertake the tusked Bore in chase.But for the land whereof thou doest enquire , It is the punick kingdome rich and strong , Adioyning on Agenors stately towne , The kingly seate of Southerne Libia , Whereas Sidonian Dido rules as Queene.But what are you that aske of me these things ? Whence may you come , or whither will you goe ?
Of Troy am I , Æneas is my name , Who driuen by warre from forth my natiue world , Put sailes to sea to seeke out Italy ; And my diuine descent from sceptred Iove , With twise twelue Phrigian ships I plowed the deepe , And made that way my mother Venus led : But of them all scarce seuen doe anchor safe , And they so wrackt and weltred by the waues , As euery tide tilts twixt their oken sides : And all of them vnburdened of their loade , Are ballassed with billowes watrie weight.But haples I , God wot , poore and vnknowne , Doe trace these Libian deserts all despisde , Exild forth Europe and wide Asia both , And haue not any couerture but heauen .
Fortune hath fauord thee what ere thou be , In sending thee vnto this curteous Coast : A Gods name on and hast thee to the Court , Where Dido will receiue ye with her smiles : And for thy ships which thou supposest lost , Not one of them hath perisht in the storme , But are ariued safe not farre from hence : And so I leaue thee to thy fortunes lot , Wishing good lucke vnto thy wandring steps. Exit .
Achates , tis my mother that is fled , I know her by the mouings of her feete : Stay gentle Venus , flye not from thy sonne , Too cruell , why wilt thou forsake me thus ? Or in these shades deceiu'st mine eye so oft ? Why talke we not together hand in hand ? And tell our griefes in more familiar termes : But thou art gone and leau'st me here alone , To dull the ayre with my discoursiue moane. Exit .
Follow ye Troians , follow this braue Lord , And plaine to him the summe of your distresse .
Why , what are you , or wherefore doe you sewe ?
Wretches of Troy , enuied of the windes , That craue such fauour at your honors feete , As poore distressed miserie may pleade : Saue , saue , O saue our ships from cruell fire , That doe complaine the wounds of thousand waues , And spare our liues whom euery spite pursues.We come not we to wrong your Libian Gods , Or steale your houshold lares from their shrines : Our hands are not prepar 'd to lawles spoyle , Nor armed to offend in any kind : Such force is farre from our vnweaponed thoughts , Whose fading weale of victorie forsooke , Forbids all hope to harbour neere our hearts .
But tell me Troians , Troians if you be , Vnto what fruitfull quarters were ye bound , Before that Boreas buckled with your sailes ?
There is a place Hesperia term 'd by vs , An ancient Empire , famoused for armes , And fertile in faire Ceres furrowed wealth , Which now we call Italia of his name , That in such peace long time did rule the same : Thither made we , When suddenly gloomie Orion rose , And led our ships into the shallow sands , Whereas the Southerne winde with brackish breath , Disperst them all amongst the wrackfull Rockes : From thence a fewe of vs escapt to land , The rest we feare are foulded in the flouds .
Braue men at armes , abandon fruitles feares , Since Carthage knowes to entertaine distresse .
I but the barbarous sort doe threat our ships , And will not let vs lodge vpon the sands : In multitudes they swarme vnto the shoare , And from the first earth interdict our feete .
My selfe will see they shall not trouble ye , Your men and you shall banquet in our Court , And euery Troian be as welcome here , As Iupiter to sillie Vausis house : Come in with me , Ile bring you to my Queene , Who shall confirme my words with further deedes .
Thankes gentle Lord for such vnlookt for grace , Might we but once more see Æneas face , Then would we hope to quite such friendly turnes , As shall surpasse the wonder of our speech.Actus 2 .
Where am I now ? these should be Carthage walles .
Why stands my sweete Æneas thus amazde ?
O my Achates , Theban Niobe , Who for her sonnes death wept out life and breath , And drie with griefe was turnd into a stone , Had not such passions in her head as I.Me thinkes that towne there should be Troy , yon Idas hill , There Zanthus streame , because here 's Priamus , And when I know it is not , then I dye .
And in this humor is Achates to , I can not choose but fall vpon my knees , And kisse his hand : O where is Hecuba , Here she was wont to sit , but sauing ayreIs nothing here , and what is this but stone ?
O yet this stone doth make Æneas weepe , And would my prayers ( as Pigmalions did ) Could giue it life , that vnder his conductWe might saile backe to Troy and be reuengdeOn these hard harted Grecians ; which reioyceThat nothing now is left of Priamus : O Priamus is left and this is he , Come , come abourd , pursue the hatefull Greekes .
What means Æneas ?
Achates though mine eyes say this is stone , Yet thinkes my minde that this is Priamus : And when my grieued heart sighes and sayes no , Then would it leape out to giue Priam life : O were I not at all so thou mightst be .
, see King Priam wags his hand , He is aliue , Troy is not ouercome .
Thy mind Æneas that would haue it soDeludes thy eye sight , Priamus is dead .
Ah Troy is sackt , and Priamus is dead , And why should poore Æneas be aliue ?
Sweete father leaue to weepe , this is not he : For were it Priam he would smile on me .
Æneas see here come the Citizens , Leaue to lament lest they laugh at our feares .
Lords of this towne , or whatsoeuer stileBelongs vnto your name , vouchsafe of ruthTo tell vs who inhabits this faire towne , What kind of people , and who gouernes them : For we are strangers driuen on this shore , And scarcely know within what Clime we are .
I heare Æneas voyce , but see him not , For none of these can be our Generall .
Like Illioneus speakes this Noble man , But Illioneus goes not in such robes .
You are Achates , or I deciu 'd .
Æneas see Sergestus or his ghost .
He meanes Æneas , let vs kisse his feete .
It is our Captaine , see Ascanius .
Liue long Æneas and Ascanius .
Achates , speake , for I am ouerioyed .
O Illioneus , art thou yet aliue ?
Blest be the time I see Achates face .
Why turnes Æneas from his trustie friends ?
Sergestus , Illioneus and the rest , Your sight amazde me , O what destiniesHaue brought my sweete companions in such plight ? O tell me , for I long to be resolu 'd .
Louely Æneas , these are Carthage walles , And here Queene Dido weares th'imperiall Crowne , Who for Troyes sake hath entertaind vs all , And clad vs in these wealthie robes we weare.Oft hath she askt vs vnder whom we seru 'd , And when we told her she would weepe for griefe , Thinking the sea had swallowed vp thy ships , And now she sees thee how will she reioyce ?
See where her seruitors passe through the hallBearing a banket , Dido is not farre .
Looke where she comes : Æneas viewd her well .
Well may I view her , but she sees not me .
What stranger art thou that doest eye me thus ?
Sometime I was a Troian mightie Queene : But Troy is not , what shall I say I am ?
Renowmed Dido , tis our Generall : warlike Æneas .
Warlike Æneas , and in these base robes ? Goe fetch the garment which Sicheus ware : Braue Prince , welcome to Carthage and to me , Both happie that Æneas is our guest : Sit in this chaire and banquet with a Queene,
is Æneas , were he cladIn weedes as bad as euer Irus ware .
This is no seate for one thats comfortles , May it please your grace to let Æneas waite : For though my birth be great , my fortunes meane , Too meane to be companion to a Queene .
Thy fortune may be greater then thy birth , Sit downe Æneas , sit in Didos place , And if this be thy sonne as I suppose , Here let him sit , be merrie louely child .
This place beseemes me not , O pardon me .
Ile haue it so , Æneas be content .
Madame , you shall be my mother .
And so I will sweete child : be merrie man , Heres to thy better fortune and good starres .
In all humilitie I thanke your grace .
Remember who thou art , speake like thy selfe , Humilitie belongs to common groomes .
And who so miserable as Æneas is ?
Lyes it in Didos hands to make thee blest , Then be assured thou art not miserable .
O Priamus , O Troy , oh Hecuba !
May I entreate thee to discourse at large , And truely to how Troy was ouercome : For many tales goe of that Cities fall , And scarcely doe agree vpon one poynt : Some say Antenor did betray the towne , Others report twas Sinons periurie : But all in this that Troy is ouercome , And Priam dead , yet how we heare no newes .
A wofull tale bids Dido to vnfould , Whose memorie like pale deaths stony mace , Beates forth my senses from this troubled soule , And makes Æneas sinke at Didos feete .
What faints Æneas to remember Troy ? In whose defence he fought so valiantly : Looke vp and speake .
Then speake Æneas with Achilles tongue , And Dido and you Carthaginian PeeresHeare me , but yet with Mirmidons harsh eares , Daily inur 'd to broyles and Massacres , Lest you be mou 'd too much with my sad tale.The Grecian souldiers tired with ten yeares warre ; Began to crye , let vs vnto our ships,
is inuincible , why stay we here ? With whose outcryes Atrides being apal 'd , Summoned the Captaines to his princely tent , Who looking on the scarres we Troians gaue , Seeing the number of their men decreast , And the remainder weake and out of heart , Gaue vp their voyces to dislodge the Campe , And so in troopes all marcht to Tenedos : Where when they came , Vlysses on the sandAssayd with honey words to turne them backe : And as he spoke to further his entent , The windes did driue huge billowes to the shoare , And heauen was darkned with tempestuous clowdes : Then he alleag 'd the Gods would haue them stay , And prophecied Troy should be ouercome : And therewithall he calde false Sinon forth , A man compact of craft and periurie , Whose ticing tongue was made of Hermes pipe , To force an hundred watchfull eyes to sleepe : And him Epeus hauing made the horse , With sacrificing wreathes vpon his head,
sent to our vnhappie towne : Who groueling in the mire of Zanthus bankes , His hands bound at his back , and both his eyesTurnd vp to heauen as one resolu 'd to dye , Our Phrigian shepherd haled within the gates , And brought vnto the Court of Priamus : To whom he vsed action so pitifull , Lookes so remorcefull , vowes so forcible , As therewithall the old man ouercome , Kist him , imbrast him , and vnloosde his bands , And then , O Dido pardon me .
Nay leaue not here , resolue me of the rest .
is a fire , the Grecians haue the towne,
O Hector who weepes not to heare thy name ?
Yet flung I forth , and desperate of my life , Ran in the thickest throngs , and with this swordSent many of their sauadge ghosts to hell.At last came Pirrhus fell and full of ire.His harnesse dropping bloud , and on his speareThe mangled head of Priams yongest sonne , And after him his band of Mirmidons , With balles of wilde fire in their murdering pawes , Which made the funerall flame that burnt faire Troy : All which hemd me about , crying , this is he .
Ah , how could poore Æneas scape their hands ?
My mother Venus iealous of my health , Conuaid me from their crooked nets and bands : So I escapt the furious Pirrhus wrath : Who then ran to the pallace of the King , And at Ioues Altar finding Priamus , About whose withered necke hung Hecuba , Foulding his hand in hers , and ioyntly bothBeating their breasts and falling on the ground , He with his faulchions poynt raisde vp at once , And with Megeras eyes stared in their face , Threatning a thousand deaths at euery glaunce.To whom the aged King thus trembling spoke:
sonne , remember what I was , Father of fiftie sonnes , but they are slaine , Lord of my fortune , but my fortunes turnd , King of this Citie , but my Troy is fired , And now am neither father , Lord , nor King : Yet who so wretched but desires to liue ? O let me liue , great Neoptolemus , Not mou 'd at all , but smiling at his teares , This butcher whil'st his hands were yet held vp , Treading vpon his breast , strooke off his hands .
O end Æneas , I can heare no more .
At which the franticke Queene leapt on his face , And in his eyelids hanging by the nayles , A little while prolong 'd her husbands life : At last the souldiers puld her by the heeles , And swong her howling in the emptie ayre , Which sent an eccho to the wounded King : Whereat he lifted vp his bedred lims , And would haue grappeld with Achilles sonne , Forgetting both his want of strength and hands , Which he disdaining whiskt his sword about , And with the wound thereof the King fell downe : Then from the nauell to the throat at once , He ript old Priam : at whose latter gaspe
cryed out , Æneas stay , The Greekes pursue me , stay and take me in.Moued with her voyce , I lept into the sea , Thinking to beare her on my backe abourd : For all our ships were launcht into the deepe , And as I swomme , she standing on the shoare , Was by the cruell Mirmidons surprizd , And after by that Pirrhus sacrifizde .
I dye with melting ruth , Æneas leaue .
O what became of aged Hecuba ?
How got Æneas to the fleete againe ?
But how scapt Helen , she that causde this warre ?
Achates speake , sorrow hath tired me quite .
What happened to the Queene we can not shewe , We heare they led her captiue into Greece , As for Æneas he swomme quickly backe , And Helena betraied DiiphobusHer Louer , after Alexander dyed , And so was reconcil 'd to Menelaus .
O had that ticing strumpet nere been borne : Troian , thy ruthfull tale hath made me sad : Come let vs thinke vpon some pleasing sport , To rid me from these melancholly thoughts .
Faire child stay thou with Didos waiting maide , Ile giue thee Sugar-almonds , sweete Conserues , A siluer girdle , and a golden purse , And this yong Prince shall be thy playfellow .
Are you Queene Didos sonne ?
I , and my mother gaue me this fine bow .
Shall I haue such a quiuer and a bow ?
Such bow , such quiuer , and such golden shafts , Will Dido giue to sweete Ascanius : For Didos sake I take thee in my armes , And sticke these spangled feathers in thy hat , Eate Comfites in mine armes , and I will sing.Now is he fast asleepe , and in this groueAmongst greene brakes Ile lay Ascanius , And strewe him with sweete smelling Violets , Blushing Roses , purple Hyacinthe : These milke white Doues shall be his Centronels : Who if that any seeke to doe him hurt , Will quickly flye to Citheidas fist.Now Cupid turne thee to Ascanius shape , And goe to Dido who in stead of himWill set thee on her lap and play with thee : Then touch her white breast with this arrow head , That she may dote vpon Æneas loue : And by that meanes repaire his broken ships , Victuall his Souldiers , giue him wealthie gifts , And he at last depart to Italy , Or els in Carthage make his kingly throne .
I will faire mother , and so play my part , As euery touch shall wound Queene Didos heart .
Sleepe my sweete nephew in these cooling shades , Free from the murmure of these running streames , The crye of beasts , the ratling of the windes , Or whisking of these leaues , all shall be still , And nothing interrupt thy quiet sleepe , Till I returne and take thee hence againe. Exit.Actus 3. Scena I .
Now Cupid cause the Carthaginian Queene , To be inamourd of thy brothers lookes , Conuey this golden arrowe in thy sleeue , Lest she imagine thou art Venus sonne : And when she strokes thee softly on the head , Then shall I touch her breast and conquer her .
How long faire Dido shall I pine for thee ? Tis not enough that thou doest graunt me loue , But that I may enioy what I desire : That loue is childish which consists in words .
Iarbus , know that thou of all my wooers ( And yet haue I had many mightier Kings ) Hast had the greatest fauours I could giue : I feare me Dido hath been counted light , In being too familiar with Iarbus : Albeit the Gods doe know no wanton thoughtHad euer residence in Didos breast .
But Dido is the fauour I request .
Feare not Iarbus , Dido may be thine .
Looke sister how Æneas little sonnePlayes with your garments and imbraceth you .
No Dido will not take me in her armes , I shall not be her sonne , she loues me not .
Weepe not sweet boy , thou shalt be Didos sonne , Sit in my lap and let me heare thee sing.No more my child , now talke another while , And tell me where learnst thou this pretie song ?
My cosin Helen taught it me in Troy .
How louely is Ascanius when he smiles ?
Will Dido let me hang about her necke ?
I wagge , and giue thee leaue to kisse her to .
What will you giue me ? now Ile haue this Fanne .
Take it Ascanius , for thy fathers sake .
Come Dido , leaue Ascanius , let vs walke .
Goe thou away , Ascanius shall stay .
Vngentle Queene , is this thy loue to me ?
O stay Iarbus , and Ile goe with thee .
And if my mother goe , Ile follow her .
Why staiest thou here ? thou art no loue of mine ?
Iarbus dye , seeing she abandons thee .
No , liue Iarbus , what hast thou deseru 'd , That I should say thou art no loue of mine ? Something thou hast deseru 'd , away I say , Depart from Carthage , come not in my sight .
Am I not King of rich Getulia ?
Iarbus pardon me , and stay a while .
Mother , looke here .
What telst thou me of rich Getulia ? Am not I Queene of Libia ? then depart .
I goe to feed the humour of my Loue , Yet not from Carthage for a thousand worlds .
Iarbus .
Doth Dido call me backe ?
No , but I charge thee neuer looke on me .
Then pull out both mine eyes , or let me dye. Exit Iarb .
Wherefore doth Dido bid Iarbus goe ?
Because his lothsome sight offends mine eye , And in my thoughts is shrin 'd another loue : O Anna , didst thou know how sweet loue were , Full soone wouldst thou abiure this single life .
Poore soule I know too well the sower of loue , O that Iarbus could but fancie me .
Is not Æneas faire and beautifull ?
Yes , and Iarbus foule and fauourles .
Is he not eloquent in all his speech ?
Yes , and Iarbus rude and rusticall .
Name not Iarbus , but sweete Anna say , Is not Æneas worthie Didos loue ?
O sister , were you Empresse of the world,
well deserues to be your loue , So lovely is he that where ere he goes , The people swarme to gaze him in the face .
But tell them none shall gaze on him but I , Lest their grosse eye-beames taint my louers cheekes:
, good sister Anna goe for him , Lest with these sweete thoughts I melt cleane away .
Then sister youle abiure Iarbus loue ?
Yet must I heare that lothsome name againe ? Runne for Æneas , or Ile flye to him. Exit Anna .
You shall not hurt my father when he comes .
No , for thy sake Ile loue thy father well.O dull conceipted Dido , that till nowDidst neuer thinke Æneas beautifull : But now for quittance of this ouersight , Ile make me bracelets of his golden haire , His glistering eyes shall be my looking glasse , His lips an altar , where Ile offer vpAs many kisses as the Sea hath sands , In stead of musicke I will heare him speake , His lookes shall be my only Librarie , And thou Æneas , Didos treasurie , In whose faire bosome I will locke more wealth , Then twentie thousand Indiaes can affoord : O here he comes , loue , loue , giue Dido leaueTo be more modest then her thoughts admit , Lest I be made a wonder to the world .
, how doth Carthage please your Lord ?
That will Æneas shewe your maiestie .
Æneas art thou there ?
I vnderstand your highnesse sent for me .
No , but now thou art here , tell me in sooth , In what might Dido highly pleasure thee .
So much haue I receiu 'd at Didos hands , As without blushing I can aske no more : Yet Queene of Affricke , are my ships vnrigd , My Sailes all rent in sunder with the winde , My Oares broken , and my Tackling lost , Yea all my Nauie split with Rockes and Shelfes : Nor Sterne nor Anchor haue our maimed Fleete , Our Masts the furious windes strooke ouer bourd : Which piteous wants if Dido will supplie , We will account her author of our liues .
Æneas , Ile repaire thy Troian ships , Conditionally that thou wilt stay with me , And let Achates saile to Italy : Ile giue thee tackling made of riueld gold , Wound on the barkes of odoriferous trees , Oares of massie Iuorie full of holes , Through which the water shall delight to play : Thy Anchors shall be hewed from Christall Rockes , Which if thou lose shall shine aboue the waues ; The Masts whereon thy swelling sailes shall hang , Hollow Pyramides of siluer plate : The sailes of foulded Lawne , where shall be wroughtThe warres of Troy , but not Troyes ouerthrow : For ballace , emptie Didos treasurie , Take what ye will , but leaue Æneas here .
, thou shalt be so meanly clad , As Seaborne Nymphes shall swarme about thy ships , And wanton Mermaides court thee with sweete songs , Flinging in fauours of more soueraigne worth , Then Thetis hangs about Apolloes necke , So that Æneas may but stay with me .
Wherefore would Dido haue Æneas stay ?
To warre against my bordering enemies:
, thinke not Dido is in loue : For if that any man could conquer me , I had been wedded ere Æneas came : See where the pictures of my suiters hang , And are not these as faire as faire may be ?
I saw this man at Troy ere Troy was sackt .
I this in Greece when Paris stole faire Helen .
This man and I were at Olympus games .
I know this face , he is a Persian borne , I traueld with him to Ætolia .
And I in Athens with this gentleman , Vnlesse I be deceiu 'd disputed once .
But speake Æneas , know you none of these ?
No Madame , but it seemes that these are Kings .
All these and others which I neuer sawe , Haue been most vrgent suiters for my loue , Some came in person , others sent their Legats : Yet none obtaind me , I am free from all , And yet God knowes intangled vnto one.This was an Orator , and thought by wordsTo compasse me , but yet he was deceiu 'd : And this a Spartan Courtier vaine and wilde , But his fantastick humours pleasde not me : This was Alcion , a Musition , But playd he nere so sweet , I let him goe : This was the wealthie King of Thessaly , But I had gold enough and cast him off : This Meleagers sonne , a warlike Prince , But weapons gree not with my tender yeares : The rest are such as all the world well knowes , Yet how I sweare by heauen and him I loue , I was as farre from loue , as they from hate .
O happie shall he be whom Dido loues .
Then neuer say that thou art miserable , Because it may be thou shalt be my loue : Yet boast not of it , for I loue thee not , And yet I hate thee not : O if I speakeI shall betray my selfe : Æneas speake , We two will goe a hunting in the woods , But not so much for thee , thou art but one , As for Achates , and his followers. Exeunt .
Here lyes my hate , Æneas cursed brat , The boy wherein false destinie delights , The heire of furie , the fauorite of the face , That vgly impe that shall outweare my wrath , And wrong my deitie with high disgrace : But I will take another order now , And race th'eternall Register of time:
shall no more call him her second hope , Nor Venus triumph in his tender youth : For here in spight of heauen Ile murder him , And feede infection with his left out life : Say Paris , now shall Venus haue the ball ? Say vengeance , now shall her Ascanius dye.O no God wot , I can not watch my time , Nor quit good turnes with double fee downe told : Tut , I am simple without made to hurt , And haue no gall at all to grieue my foes : But lustfull Ioue and his adulterous child , Shall finde it written on confusions front , That onely Iuno rules in Rhamnuse towne .
What should this meane ? my Doues are back returnd , Who warne me of such daunger prest at hand , To harme my sweete Ascanius louely life .
, my mortall foe , what make you here ? Auaunt old witch and trouble not my wits .
Fie Venus , that such causeles words of wrath , Should ere defile so faire a mouth as thine : Are not we both sprong of celestiall rase , And banquet as two Sisters with the Gods ? Why is it then displeasure should disioyne , Whom kindred and acquaintance counites .
Out hatefull hag , thou wouldst haue slaine my sonne , Had not my Doues discou'rd thy entent : But I will teare thy eyes fro forth thy head , And feast the birds with their bloud-shotten balles , If thou but lay thy fingers on my boy .
Is this then all the thankes that I shall haue , For sauing him from Snakes and Serpents stings , That would haue kild him sleeping as he lay ? What though I was offended with thy sonne , And wrought him mickle woe on sea and land , When for the hate of Troian Ganimed , That was aduanced by my Hebes shame , And Paris iudgement of the heauenly ball , I mustred all the windes vnto his wracke , And vrg 'd each Element to his annoy : Yet now I doe repent me of his ruth , And wish that I had neuer wrongd him so : Bootles I sawe it was to warre with fate , That hath so many vnresisted friends : Wherefore I chaunge my counsell with the time , And planted loue where enuie erst had sprong .
Sister of Ioue , if that thy loue be such , As these thy protestations doe paint forth , We two as friends one fortune will deuide:
shall lay his arrowes in thy lap , And to a Scepter chaunge his golden shafts , Fancie and modestie shall liue as mates , And thy faire peacockes by my pigeons pearch : Loue my Æneas , and desire is thine , The day , the night , my Swannes , my sweetes are thine .
More then melodious are these words to me , That ouercioy my soule with their content:
, sweete Venus , how may I deserueSuch amourous fauours at thy beautious hand ? But that thou maist more easilie perceiue , How highly I doe prize this amitie , Harke to a motion of eternall league , Which I will make in quittance of thy loue : Thy sonne thou knowest with Dido now remaines , And feedes his eyes with fauours of her Court , She likewise in admyring spends her time , And can not talke nor thinke of ought but him : Why should not they then ioyne in marriage , And bring forth mightie Kings to Carthage towne , Whom casualtie of sea hath made such friends ? And Venus , let there be a match confirmdBetwixt these two , whose loues are so alike , And both our Deities conioynd in one , Shall chaine felicitie vnto their throne .
Well could I like this reconcilements meanes , But much I feare my sonne will nere consent , Whose armed soule alreadie on the sea , Darts forth her light to Lauinias shoare .
Faire Queene of loue , I will deuorce these doubts , And finde the way to wearie such fond thoughts : This day they both a hunting forth will rideInto these woods , adioyning to these walles , When in the midst of all their gamesome sports , Ile make the Clowdes dissolue their watrie workes , And drench Siluanus dwellings with their shewers , Then in one Caue the Queene and he shall meete , And interchangeably discourse their thoughts , Whose short conclusion will seale vp their hearts , Vnto the purpose which we now propound .
Sister , I see you sauour of my wiles , Be it as you will haue for this once , Meane time , Ascanius shall be my charge , Whom I will beare to Ida in mine armes , And couch him in Adonis purple downe , Exeunt .
Æneas , thinke not but I honor thee , That thus in person goe with thee to hunt : My princely robes thou seest are layd aside , Whose glittering pompe Dianas shrowdes supplies , All fellowes now disposde alike to sporte , The woods are wide , and we haue store of game : Faire Troian , hold my golden bowe awhile , Vntill I gird my quiuer to my side : Lords goe before , we two must talke alone .
Vngentle , can she wrong Iarbus so ? Ile dye before a stranger haue that grace : We two will talke alone , what words be these ?
What makes Iarbus here of all the rest ? We could haue gone without your companie .
But loue and duetie led him on perhaps , To presse beyond acceptance to your sight .
Why man of Troy , doe I offend thine eyes ? Or art thou grieude thy betters presse so nye ?
How now Getulian , are ye growne so braue , To challenge vs with your comparisons ? Pesant , goe seeke companions like thy selfe , And meddle not with any that I loue:
, be not moude at what he sayes , For otherwhile he will be out of ioynt .
Women may wrong by priuiledge of loue : But should that man of men ( Dido except ) Haue taunted me in these opprobrious termes , I would haue either drunke his dying bloud , Or els I would haue giuen my life in gage ?
Huntsmen , why pitch you not your toyles apace , And rowse the light foote Deere from forth their laire .
Sister , see see Ascanius in his pompe , Bearing his huntspeare brauely in his hand .
Yea little sonne , are you so forward now ?
I mother , I shall one day be a man , And better able vnto other armes , Meane time these wanton weapons serue my warre , Which I will breake betwixt a Lyons iawes .
What , darest thou looke a Lyon in the face ?
I , and outface him to , doe what he can .
How like his father speaketh he in all ?
And mought I liue to see him sacke rich Thebes , And loade his speare with Grecian Princes heads , Then would I wish me with Anchises Tombe , And dead to honour that hath brought me vp .
And might I liue to see thee shipt away , And hoyst aloft on Neptunes hideous hilles , Then would I wish me in faire Didos armes , And dead to scorne that hath pursued me so .
Stoute friend Achates , doest thou know this wood ?
As I remember , here you shot the Deere , That sau 'd your famisht souldiers liues from death , When first you set your foote vpon the shoare , And here we met fair Venus virgine like , Bearing her bowe and quiuer at her backe .
O how these irksome labours now delight , And ouerioy my thoughts with their escape : Who would not vndergoe all kind of toyle , To be well stor 'd with such a winters tale ?
Æneas , leaue these dumpes and lets away , Some to the mountaines , some vnto the soyle , You to the vallies , thou vnto the house .
I , this it is which wounds me to the death , To see a Phrigian far fet to the sea , Preferd before a man of maiestie : O loue , O hate , O cruell womens hearts , That imitate the Moone in euery chaunge , And like the Planets euer loue to raunge : What shall I doe thus wronged with disdaine ? Reuenge me on Æneas , or on her : On her ? fond man , that were to warre gainst heauen , And with one shaft prouoke ten thousand darts : This Troians end will be thy enuies aime , Whose bloud will reconcile thee to content , And make loue drunken with thy sweete desire : But Dido that now holdeth him so deare , Will dye with very tidings of his death : But time will discontinue her content , And mould her minde vnto newe fancies shapes : O God of heauen , turne the hand of fateVnto that happie day of my delight , And then , what then ? Iarbus shall but loue : So doth he now , though not with equall gaine , That resteth in the riuall of thy paine , Who nere will cease to soare till he be slaine. Exit .
Æneas .
Dido .
Tell me deare loue , how found you out this Caue ?
By chance sweete Queene , as Mars and Venus met .
Why , that was in a net , where we are loose , And yet I am not free , oh would I were .
Why , what is it that Dido may desireAnd not obtaine , be it in humaine power ?
The thing that I will dye before I aske , And yet desire to haue before I dye .
It is not ought Æneas may achieue ?
Æneas no , although his eyes doe pearce .
What , hath Iarbus angred her in ought ? And will she be auenged on his life ?
Not angred me , except in angring thee .
Who then of all so cruell may he be , That should detaine thy eye in his defects ?
The man that I doe eye where ere I am , Whose amorous face like Pean sparkles fire , When as he buts his beames on Floras bed,
hath put on Cupids shape , And I must perish in his burning armes:
, O Æneas , quench these flames .
What ailes my Queene , is she falne sicke of late ?
Not sicke my loue , but sicke , I must concealeThe torment , that it bootes me not reueale ; And yet Ile speake , and yet Ile hold my peace , Doe shame her worst , I will disclose my griefe:
, thou art he , what did I say ? Something it was that now I haue forgot .
What meanes faire Dido by this doubtfull speech ?
Nay , nothing , but Æneas loues me not .
Æneas thoughts dare not ascend so highAs Didos heart , which Monarkes might not scale .
It was because I sawe no King like thee , Whose golden Crowne might ballance my content : But now that I haue found what to effect , I followe one that loueth fame for me , And rather had seeme faire Sirens eyes , Then to the Carthage Queene that dyes for him .
If that your maiestie can looke so lowe , As my despised worths , that shun all praise , With this my hand I giue to you my heart , And vow by all the Gods of Hospitalitie , By heauen and earth , and my faire brothers bowe , By Paphos , Capys , and the purple Sea , From whence my radiant mother did descend , And by this Sword that saued me from the Greekes , Neuer to leaue these newe vpreared walles , Whiles Dido liues and rules in Iunos towne , Neuer to like or loue any but her .
What more then delian musicke doe I heare , That calles my soule from forth his liuing seate , To moue vnto the measures of delight : Kind clowdes that sent forth such a curteous storme , As made disdaine to flye to fancies lap : Stoute loue in mine armes make thy Italy , Whose Crowne and kingdome rests at thy commande .
, not Æneas be thou calde : The King of Carthage , not Anchises sonne : Hold , take these Iewels at thy Louers hand , These golden bracelets , and this wedding ring , Wherewith my husband woo 'd me yet a maide , And be thou king of Libia , by my guift .
Actus 4. Scena 1 .
Did euer men see such a sudden storme ? Or day so cleere so suddenly orecast ?
I thinke some fell Inchantresse dwelleth here , That can call them forth when as she please , And diue into blacke tempests treasurie , When as she mcanes to maske the world with clowdes .
In all my life I neuer knew the like , It haild , it snowde , it lightned all at once .
I thinke it was the diuels reuelling night , There was such hurly burly in the heauens : Doubtles Apollos Axeltree is crackt , Or aged Atlas shoulder out of ioynt , The motion was soouer violent .
In all this coyle , where haue ye left the Queene ?
Nay , where is my warlike father , can you tell ?
Behold where both of them come forth the Caue .
Come forth the Caue : can heauen endure this sight ?
, curse that vnreuenging Ioue , Whose flintie darts slept in Tiphous den , Whiles these adulterers surfetted with sinne : Nature , why mad'st me not some poysonous beast , That with the sharpnes of my edged sting , I might haue stakte them both vnto the earth , Whil'st they were sporting in this darksome Caue ?
The ayre is cleere , and Southerne windes are whist , Come Dido , let vs hasten to the towne , Since gloomie Æolus doth cease to frowne .
Achates and Ascanius , well met .
Faire Anna , how escapt you from the shower ?
As others did , by running to the wood .
But where were you Iarbus all this while ?
Not with Æneas in the vgly Caue .
I see Æneas sticketh in your minde , But I will soone put by that stumbling blocke , And quell those hopes that thus employ your cares. Exeunt .
Come seruants , come bring forth the Sacrifize , That I may pacifie that gloomie Ioue , Whose emptie Altars haue enlarg 'd our illes.Eternall Ioue , great master of the Clowdes , Father of gladnesse , and all frollicke thoughts , That with thy gloomie hand corrects the heauen , When ayrie creatures warre amongst themselues : Heare , heare , O heare Iarbus plaining prayers , Whose hideous ecchoes make the welkin howle , And all the woods Eliza to resound : The woman that thou wild vs entertaine , Where straying in our borders vp and downe , She crau 'd a hide of ground to build a towne , With whom we did deuide both lawes and land , And all the fruites that plentie els sends forth , Scorning our loues and royall marriage rites , Yeelds vp her beautie to a strangers bed , Who hauing wrought her shame , is straight way fled : Now if thou beest a pitying God of power , On whom ruth and compassion euer waites , Redresse these wrongs , and warne him to his ships , That now afflicts me with his flattering eyes .
How now Iarbus , at your prayers so hard ?
I Anna , is there ought you would with me ?
Nay , no such waightie busines of import , But may be slackt vntill another time : Yet if you would partake with me the causeOf this deuotion that detaineth you , I would be thankfull for such curtesie .
Anna , against this Troian doe I pray , Who seekes to rob me of thy Sisters loue , And dive into her heart by coloured lookes .
Alas poore King that labours so in vaine.For her that so delighteth in thy paine : Be rul 'd by me , and seeke some other loue , Whose yeelding heart may yeeld thee more reliefe .
Mine eye is fixt where fancie can not start , O leaue me , leaue me to my silent thoughts , That register the numbers of my ruth , And I will either moue the thoughtles flint , Or drop out both mine eyes in drisling teares , Before my sorrowes tide haue any stint .
I will not leaue Iarbus whom I loue , In this delight of dying pensiuenes : Away with Dido , Anna be thy song,
that doth admire thee more then heauen .
I may nor will list to such loathsome chaunge , That intercepts the course of my desire : Seruants , come fetch these emptie vessels here , For I will flye from these alluring eyes , That doe pursue my peace where ere it goes. Exit .
Iarbus stay , louing Iarbus stay , For I haue honey to present thee with : Hard hearted , wilt not deigne to heare me speake , Ile follow thee with outcryes nere the lesse , And strewe thy walkes with my discheueld haire. Exit .
Carthage , my friendly host adue , Since destinie doth call me from the shoare:
this night descending in a dreame , Hath summond me to fruitfull Italy:
wils it so , my mother wils it so : Let my Phenissa graunt , and then I goe : Graunt she or no , Æneas must away , Whose golden fortunes clogd with courtly ease , Can not ascend to Fames immortall house , Or banquet in bright honors burnisht hall , Till he hath furrowed Neptunes glassie fieldes , And cut a passage through his toples hilles:
come forth , Sergestus , Illioneus,
, haste away , Æneas calles .
What willes our Lord , or wherefore did he call ?
The dreames ( braue mates ) that did beset my bed , When sleepe but newly had imbrast the night , Commaunds me leaue these vnrenowmed beames , Whereas Nobilitie abhors to stay , And none but base Æneas will abide : Abourd , abourd , since Fates doe bid abourd , And slice the Sea with sable coloured ships , On whom the nimble windes may all day waight , And follow them as footemen through the deepe : Yet Dido casts her eyes like anchors out , To stay my Fleete from loosing forth the Bay : Come backe , come backe , I heare her crye a farre , And let me linke my bodie to my lips , That tyed together by the striuing tongues , We may as one saile into Italy .
Banish that ticing dame from forth your mouth , And follow your foreseeing starres in all ; This is no life for men at armes to liue , Where daliance doth consume a Souldiers strength , And wanton motions of alluring eyes , Effeminate our mindes inur 'd to warre .
Why , let vs build a Citie of our owne , And not stand lingering here for amorous lookes : Will Dido raise old Priam forth his graue , And build the towne againe the Greekes did burne ? No no , she cares not how we sinke or swimme , So she may haue Æneas in her armes .
To Italy , sweete friends to Italy , We will not stay a minute longer here .
Troians abourd , and I will follow you , I faine would goe , yet beautie calles me backe : To leaue her so and not once say farewell , Were to transgresse against all lawes of loue : But if I vse such ceremonious thankes , As parting friends accustome on the shoare , Her siluer armes will coll me round about , And teares of pearle , crye stay , Æneas , stay : Each word she sayes will then containe a Crowne , And euery speech be ended with a kisse : I may not dure this female drudgerie , To sea Æneas , finde out Italy. Exit .
O Anna , runne vnto the water side , They say Æneas men are going abourd , It may be he will steale away with them : Stay not to answere me , runne Anna runne.O foolish Troians that would steale from hence , And not let Dido vnderstand their drift : I would haue giuen Achates store of gold , And Illioneus gum and Libian spice , The common souldiers rich imbrodered coates , And siluer whistles to controule the windes , Which Circes sent Sicheus when he liued : Vnworthie are they of a Queenes reward : See where they come , how might I doe to chide ?
Twas time to runne , Æneas had been gone , The sailes were hoysing vp , and he abourd .
Is this thy loue to me ?
O princely Dido , giue me leaue to speake , I went to take my farewell Achates .
How haps Achates bid me not farewell ?
Because I feard your grace would keepe me here .
To rid thee of that doubt , abourd againe , I charge thee put to sea and stay not here .
Then let Æneas goe abourd with vs .
Get you abourd , Æneas meanes to stay .
The sea is rough , the windes blow to the shoare .
O false Æneas , now the sea is rough , But when you were abourd twas calme enough , Thou and Achates ment to saile away .
Hath not the Carthage Queene mine onely sonne ? Thinkes Dido I will goe and leaue him here ?
Æneas pardon me , for I forgotThat yong Ascanius lay with me this night : Loue made me iealous , but to make amends , Weare the emperiall Crowne of Libia , Sway thou the Punike Scepter in my steede , And punish me Æneas for this crime .
This kisse shall be faire Didos punishment .
O how a Crowne becomes Æneas head ! Stay here Æneas , and commaund as King .
How vaine am I to weare this Diadem , And beare this golden Scepter in my hand ? A Burgonet of steele , and not a Crowne , A Sword , and not a Scepter fits Æneas .
O keepe them still , and let me gaze my fill : Now lookes Æneas like immortall Ioue , O where is Ganimed to hold his cup , And Mercury to flye for what he calles , Ten thousand Cupids houer in the ayre , And fanne it in Æneas louely face , O that the Clowdes were here wherein thou fleest , That thou and I vnseene might sport our selues : Heauens enuious of our ioyes is waxen pale , And when we whisper , then the starres fall downe , To be partakers of our honey talke .
O Dido , patronesse of all our liues , When I leaue thee , death be my punishment , Swell raging seas , frowne wayward destinies , Blow windes , threaten ye Rockes and sandie shelfes , This is the harbour that Æneas seekes , Lets see what tempests can anoy me now .
Not all the world can take thee from mine armes,
may commaund as many Moores , As in the Sea are little water drops : And now to make experience of my loue , Faire sister Anna leade my louer forth , And seated on my Gennet , let him rideAs Didos husband through the punicke streetes , And will my guard with Mauritanian darts , To waite vpon him as their soueraigne Lord .
What if the Citizens repine thereat ?
Those that dislike what Dido giues in charge , Commaund my guard to slay for their offence : Shall vulgar pesants storme at what I doe ? The ground is mine that giues them sustenance , The ayre wherein they breathe , the water , fire , All that they haue , their lands , their goods , their liues , And I the Goddesse of all these , commaund
ride as Carthaginian King .
Æneas for his parentage deseruesAs large a kingdome as is Libia .
I , and vnlesse the destinies be false , I shall be planted in as rich a land .
Speake of no other land , this land is thine,
is thine , henceforth Ile call thee Lord : Doe as I bid thee , sister leade the way , And from a turret Ile behold my loue .
Then here in me shall flourish Priams race , And thou and I Achates , for reuenge , For Troy , for Priam , for his fiftie sonnes , Our kinsmens loues , and thousand guiltles soules , Will leade an hoste against the hatefull Greekes , And fire proude Lacedemon ore their heads. Exit .
Speakes not Æneas like a Conqueror ? O blessed tempests that did driue him in , O happie sand that made him runne aground : Henceforth you shall be our Carthage Gods : I , but it may be he will leaue my loue , And seeke a forraine land calde Italy : O that I had a charme to keepe the windesWithin the closure of a golden ball , Or that the Tyrrhen sea were in mine armes , That he might suffer shipwracke on my breast , As oft as he attempts to hoyst vp saile : I must preuent him , wishing will not serue : Goe , bid my Nurse take yong Ascanius , And beare him in the countrey to her house,
will not goe without his sonne : Yet left he should , for I am full of feare , Bring me his oares , his tackling , and his sailes ; What if I sinke his ships ? O heele frowne.Better he frowne , then I should dye for griefe : I can not see him frowne , it may not be : Armies of foes resolu 'd to winne this towne , Or impious traitors vowde to haue my life , Affright me not , onely Æneas frowneIs that which terrifies poore Didos heart : Nor bloudie speares appearing in the ayre , Presage the downfall of my Emperie , Nor blazing Commets threatens Didos death , It is Æneas frowne that ends my daies : If he forsake me not , I neuer dye , For in his lookes I see eternitie , And heele make me immortall with a kisse .
Your Nurse is gone with yong Ascanius , And heres Æneas tackling , oares and sailes .
My Lord Ascanius , ye must goe with me .
Whither must I goe ? Ile stay with my mother .
No , thou shalt goe with me vnto my house , I haue an Orchard that hath store of plums , Browne Almonds , Seruises , ripe Figs and Dates , Dewberries , Apples , yellow Orenges , A garden where are Bee hiues full of honey , Musk-roses , and a thousand sort of flowers , And in the midst doth run a siluer streame , Where thou shalt see the red gild fishes leape , White Swannes , and many louely water fowles : Now speake Ascanius , will ye goe or no ?
Come come Ile goe , how farre hence is your house ?
But hereby child , we shall get thither straight .
Nurse I am wearie , will you carrie me ?
I , so youle dwell with me and call me mother .
So youle loue me , I care not if I doe .
That I might liue to see this boy a man , How pretilie he laughs , goe ye wagge , Youle be a twigger when you come to age.Say Dido what she will I am not old , Ile be no more a widowe , I am young , Ile haue a husband , or els a louer .
A husband and no teeth !
O what meane I to haue such foolish thoughts ! Foolish is loue , a toy , O sacred loue , If there be any heauen in earth , tis loue : Especially in women of your yeares.Blush blush for shame , why shouldst thou thinke of loue ? A graue , and not a louer fits thy age : A graue , why ? I may liue a hundred yeares , Fourescore is but a girles age , loue is sweete : My vaines are withered , and my sinewes drie , Why doe I thinke of loue now I should dye ?
Come Nurse .
Well , if he come a wooing he shall speede , O how vnwise was I to say him nay ! Exeunt.Actus 5.Enter Æneas with a paper in his hand , drawing the platforme of thecitie , with him Achates , Cloanthus , and Illieneus .
Triumph my mates , our trauels are at end , Here will Æneas build a statelier Troy , Then that which grim Atrides ouerthrew:
shall vaunt her pettie walles no more , For I will grace them with a fairer frame , And clad her in a Chrystall liuerie , Wherein the day may euermore delight : From golden India Ganges will I fetch , Whose wealthie streames may waite vpon her towers , And triple wise intrench her round about : The Sunne from Egypt shall rich odors bring , Wherewith his burning beames like labouring Bees , That loade their thighes with Hyblas honeys spoyles , Shall here vnburden their exhaled sweetes , And plant our pleasant suburbes with her fumes .
What length or bredth shal this braue towne cōtaine ?
Not past foure thousand paces at the most .
But what shall it be calde , Troy as before ?
That haue I not determinde with my selfe .
Let it be term 'd Ænea by your name .
Rather Ascania by your little sonne .
Nay , I will haue it calde Anchisaon , Of my old fathers name .
Æneas stay , Ioues Herald bids thee stay .
Whom doe I see , Ioues winged messenger ? Welcome to Carthage new erected towne .
Why cosin , stand you building Cities here , And beautifying the Empire of this Queene , While Italy is cleane out of thy minde ? To too forgetfull of thine owne affayres , Why wilt thou so betray thy sonnes good hap ? The king of Gods sent me from highest heauen , To sound this angrie message in thine eares.Vaine man , what Monarky expectst thou here ? Or with what thought sleepst thou in Libia shoare ? If that all glorie hath forsaken thee , And thou despise the praise of such attempts : Yet thinke vpon Ascanius prophesie , And yong Iulus more then thousand yeares , Whom I haue brought from Ida where he slept , And bore yong Cupid vnto Cypresse Ile .
This was my mother that beguild the Queene , And made me take my brother for my sonne : No maruell Dido though thou be in loue , That daylie danlest Cupid in thy armes : Welcome sweet child , where hast thou been this long ?
Eating sweet Comfites with Queene Didos maide , Who euer since hath luld me in her armes .
Sergestus , beare him hence vnto our ships , Lest Dido spying him keepe him for a pledge .
Spendst thou thy time about this little boy , And giuest not care vnto the charge I bring ? I tell thee thou must straight to Italy , Or els abide the wrath of frowning Ioue .
How should I put into the raging deepe , Who haue no sailes nor tackling for my ships ? What would the Gods haue me Deucalion like , Flote vp and downe where ere the billowes driue ? Though she repairde my fleete and gaue me ships , Yet hath she tane away my oares and masts , And left me neither saile nor sterne abourd .
How now Æneas , sad , what meanes these dumpes ?
Iarbus , I am cleane besides my selfe,
hath heapt on me such a desperate charge , Which neither art nor reason may atchieue , Nor I deuise by what meanes to contriue .
As how I pray , may I entreat you tell .
With speede he bids me sail to Italy.When as I want both rigging for my fleete , And also furniture for these my men .
If that be all , then cheare thy drooping lookes , For I will furnish thee with such supplies : Let some of those thy followers goe with me , And they shall haue what thing so ere thou needst .
Thankes good Iarbus for thy friendly ayde,
and the rest shall waite on thee , Whil'st I rest thankfull for this curtesie .
Now will I haste vnto Lauinian shoare , And raise a new foundation to old Troy , Witnes the Gods , and witnes heauen and earth , How loth I am to leaue these Libian bounds , But that eternall Iupiter commands .
I feare I sawe Æneas little sonne , Led by Achates to the Troian fleete : If it be so , his father meanes to flye : But here he is , now Dido trie thy wit .
, wherefore goe thy men abourd ? , Why are thy ships new rigd ? or to what endLauncht from the hauen , lye they in the Rhode ? Pardon me though I aske , loue makes me aske .
O pardon me , if I resolue thee why:
will not faine with his deare loue , I must from hence : this day swift MercuryWhen I was laying a platforme for these walles , Sent from his father Ioue , appeard to me , And in his name rebukt me bitterly , For lingering here , neglecting Italy .
But yet Æneas will not leaue his loue .
I am commaunded by immortal Ioue , To leaue this towne and passe to Italy , And therefore must of force .
These words proceed not from Æneas heart .
Not from my heart , for I can hardly goe , And yet I may not stay , Dido farewell .
Farewell : is this the mends for Didos loue ? Doe Troians vse to quit their Louers thus ? Fare well may Dido , so Æneas stay , I dye , if my Æneas say farewell .
Then let me goe and neuer say farewell , Let me goe , farewell , I must from hence .
These words are poyson to poore Didos soule , O speake like my Æneas , like my loue : Why look'st thou toward the sea ? the time hath beenWhen Didos beautie chaungd thine eyes to her ; Am I lesse faire then when thou sawest me first ? O then Æneas , tis for griefe of thee : Say thou wilt stay in Carthage with my Queene , And Didos beautie will returne againe:
, say , how canst thou take thy leaue ? Wilt thou kisse Dido ? O thy lips haue sworneTo stay with Dido : canst thou take her hand ? Thy Hand and mine haue plighted mutuall faith , Therefore vnkinde Æneas , must thou say , Then let me goe , and neuer say farewell .
O Queene of Carthage , wert thou vgly blacke,
could not choose but hold thee deare , Yet must he not gainsay the Gods behest .
The Gods , what Gods be those that seeke my death ? Wherein haue I offended Iupiter , That he should take Æneas from mine armes ? O no , the Gods wey not what Louers doe , It is Æneas calles Æneas hence , And wofull Dido by these blubbred cheekes , By this right hand , and by our spousall rites , Desires Æneas to remaine with her : Si bene quid de te merui , fuit aut tibi quidquamDulce meum , miserere domus labentis : & istamOro , si quis ad hac precibus locus , exue mentem .
Desine meque tuis incendere teque querelis , Italiam non sponte sequor .
Hast thou forgot how many neighbour kingsWere vp in armes , for making thee my loue ? How Carthage did rebell , Iarbus storme , And all the world calles me a second Helen , For being intangled by a strangers lookes : So thou wouldst proue as true as Paris did , Would , as faire Troy was , Carthage might be sackt , And I be calde a second Helena.Had I a sonne by thee , the griefe were lesse , That I might see Æneas in his face : Now if thou goest , what canst thou leaue behind , But rather will augment then ease my woe ?
In vaine my loue thou spendst thy fainting breath , If words might moue me I were ouercome .
What meanes my sister thus to raue and crye ?
O Anna , my Æneas is abourd , And leauing me will saile to Italy.Once didst thou goe , and he came backe againe , Now bring him backe , and thou shalt be a Queene , And I will liue a priuate life with him .
Wicked Æneas .
Call him not wicked , sister speake him faire , And looke vpon him with a Mermaides eye , Tell him , I neuer vow 'd at Aulis gulfeThe desolation of his natiue Troy , Nor sent a thousand ships vnto the walles , Nor euer violated faith to him : Request him gently ( Anna ) to returne , I craue but this , he stay a tide or two , That I may learne to beare it patiently , If he depart thus suddenly , I dye : Run Anna , run , stay not to answere me .
I goe faire sister , heauens graunt good successe .
O Dido , your little sonne AscaniusIs gone ! he lay with me last night , And in the morning he was stolne from me , I thinke some Fairies haue beguiled me .
O cursed hagge and false dissembling wretch ! That slayest me with thy harsh and hellish tale , Thou for some pettie guift hast let him goe , And I am thus deluded of my boy : Away with her to prison presently , Traytoresse too keend and cursed Sorceresse .
I know not what you meane by treason , I , I am as true as any one of yours. Exeunt the Nurse .
Away with her , suffer her not to speake.My sister comes , I like not her sad lookes .
Before I came , Æneas was abourd , And spying me , hoyst vp the sailes amaine : But I cride out , Æneas , false Æneas stay.Then gan he wagge his hand , which yet held vp , Made me suppose he would haue heard me speake : Then gan they driue into the Ocean , Which when I viewd , I cride , Æneas stay,
, faire Dido wils Æneas stay : Yet he whose heart of adamant or flint , My teares nor plaints could mollifie a whit : Then carelesly I rent my haire for griefe , Which seene to all , though he beheld me not , They gan to moue him to redresse my ruth , And stay a while to heare what I could say , But he clapt vnder hatches saild away .
O Anna , Anna , I will follow him .
How can ye goe when he hath all your fleete ?
Ile frame me wings of waxe like Icarus , And ore his ships will soare vnto the Sunne , That they may melt and I fall in his armes : Or els Ile make a prayer vnto the waues , That I may swim to him like Tritons neece : O Anna , fetch Orions Harpe , That I may tice a Dolphin to the shoare , And ride vpon his backe vnto my loue : Looke sister , looke louely Æneas ships , See see , the billowes heaue him vp to heauen , And now downe falles the keeles into the deepe : O sister , sister , take away the Rockes , Theile breake his ships , O Proteus , Neptune , Ioue , Saue , saue Æneas , Didos leefest loue ! Now is he come on shoare safe without hurt : But see , Achates wils him put to sea , And all the Sailers merrie make for ioy , But he remembring me shrinkes backe againe : See where he comes , welcome , welcome my loue .
Ah sister , leaue these idle fantasies , Sweet sister cease , remember who you are .
I am , vnlesse I be deceiu 'd , And must I raue thus for a renegate ? Must I make ships for him to saile away ? Nothing can beare me to him but a ship , And he hath all thy fleete , what shall I doe ? But dye in furie of this ouersight ? I , I must be the murderer of my selfe : No but I am not , yet I will be straight .
be glad , now haue I found a meaneTo rid me from these thoughts of Lunacie : Not farre from hence there is a woman famoused for arts , Daughter vnto the Nimphs Hesperides , Who wild me sacrifice his ticing relliques : Goe Anna , bid my seruants bring me fire. Exit Anna .
How long will Dido mourne a strangers flight , That hath dishonord her and Carthage both ? How long shall I with griefe consume my daies , And reape no guerdon for my truest loue ?
Iarbus , talk not of Æneas , let him goe , Lay to thy hands and helpe me make a fire , That shall consume all that this stranger left , For I entend a priuate Sacrifize , To cure my minde that melts for vnkind loue .
But afterwards will Dido graunt me loue ?
I , I , Iarbus , after this is done , None in the world shall have my loue but thou : So , leaue me now , let none approach this place. Exit Iarbus.Now Dido , with these reliques burne thy selfe , And make Æneas famous through the world , For periurie and slaughter of a Queene : Here lye the Sword that in the darksome CaueHe drew , and swore by to be true to me , Thou shalt burne first , thy crime is worse then his : Here lye the garment which I cloath 'd him in , When first he came on shoare , perish thou to : These letters , lines , and periurd papers all , Shall burne to cinders in this prectious flame.And now ye Gods that guide the starrie frame , And order all things at your high dispose ; Graunt , though the traytors land in Italy , They may be still tormented with vnrest , And from mine ashes let a Conquerour rise , That may reuenge this treason to a Queene , By plowing vp his Countries with the Sword : Betwixt this land and that be neuer league , Littora littoribus contraria , fluctibus undas
Liue false Æneas , truest Dido dyes,
O helpe Iarbus , Dido in these flamesHath burnt her selfe , aye me , vnhappie me !
Cursed Iarbus , dye to expiateThe griefe that tires vpon thine inward soule,
I come to thee , aye me Æneas .
What can my teares or cryes preuaile me now ?
is dead , Iarbus slaine , Iarbus my deare loue , O sweet Iarbus , Annas sole delight , What fatall destinie enuies me thus , To see my sweet Iarbus slay himselfe ? But Anna now shall honor thee in death , And mixe her bloud with thine , this shall I doe , That Gods and men may pitie this my death , And rue our ends senceles of life or breath ; Now sweet Iarbus stay , I come to thee .
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Tragedy of Dido Queene of Carthageby Christopher Marlowe*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIDO QUEENE OF CARTHAGE ******** This file should be named 16169-0.txt or 16169-0.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.﻿Project Gutenberg 's Tamburlaine the Great , Part I. , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Posting Date : August 5 , 2008 [ EBook # 1094 ] Release Date : November , 1997
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT , PART I. ***Produced by Gary R. YoungTAMBURLAINE THE GREAT , IN TWO PARTS.This is Part I.By Christopher MarloweEdited By The Rev. Alexander Dyce.TRANSCRIBER 'S COMMENTS ON THE PREPARATION OF THE E-TEXT : SQUARE BRACKETS : The square brackets , i.e. [ ] are copied from the printed book , without change , except that the stage directions usually do nothave closing brackets. These have been added .
For this E-Text version of the book , the footnotes have beenconsolidated at the end of the play.Numbering of the footnotes has been changed , and each footnoteis given a unique identity in the form [ XXX ] .CHANGES TO THE TEXT : Character names were expanded. For Example , TAMBURLAINE was
, ZENOCRATE was ZENO. , etc .
Brother Cosroe , I find myself agriev 'd ; Yet insufficient to express the same , For it requires a great and thundering speech : Good brother , tell the cause unto my lords ; I know you have a better wit than I .
Unhappy Persia , -- that in former ageHast been the seat of mighty conquerors , That , in their prowess and their policies , Have triumph 'd over Afric , [ 5 ] and the boundsOf Europe where the sun dares scarce appearFor freezing meteors and congealed cold , -- Now to be rul 'd and govern 'd by a manAt whose birth-day Cynthia with Saturn join 'd , And Jove , the Sun , and Mercury deniedTo shed their [ 6 ] influence in his fickle brain ! Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at thee , Meaning to mangle all thy provinces .
Brother , I see your meaning well enough , And through [ 7 ] your planets I perceive you thinkI am not wise enough to be a king : But I refer me to my noblemen , That know my wit , and can be witnesses.I might command you to be slain for this , -- Meander , might I not ?
Not for so small a fault , my sovereign lord .
I mean it not , but yet I know I might. -- Yet live ; yea , live ; Mycetes wills it so. -- Meander , thou , my faithful counsellor , Declare the cause of my conceived grief , Which is , God knows , about that Tamburlaine , That , like a fox in midst of harvest-time , Doth prey upon my flocks of passengers ; And , as I hear , doth mean to pull my plumes : Therefore 't is good and meet for to be wise .
Oft have I heard your majesty complainOf Tamburlaine , that sturdy Scythian thief , That robs your merchants of PersepolisTrading by land unto the Western Isles , And in your confines with his lawless trainDaily commits incivil [ 8 ] outrages , Hoping ( misled by dreaming prophecies ) To reign in Asia , and with barbarous armsTo make himself the monarch of the East : But , ere he march in Asia , or displayHis vagrant ensign in the Persian fields , Your grace hath taken order by Theridamas , Charg 'd with a thousand horse , to apprehendAnd bring him captive to your highness ' throne .
Full true thou speak'st , and like thyself , my lord , Whom I may term a Damon for thy love : Therefore 't is best , if so it like you all , To send my thousand horse incontinent [ 9 ] To apprehend that paltry Scythian.How like you this , my honourable lords ? Is it not a kingly resolution ?
It can not choose , because it comes from you .
Then hear thy charge , valiant Theridamas , The chiefest [ 10 ] captain of Mycetes ' host , The hope of Persia , and the very legsWhereon our state doth lean as on a staff , That holds us up and foils our neighbour foes : Thou shalt be leader of this thousand horse , Whose foaming gall with rage and high disdainHave sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.Go frowning forth ; but come thou smiling home , As did Sir Paris with the Grecian dame : Return with speed ; time passeth swift away ; Our life is frail , and we may die to-day .
Before the moon renew her borrow 'd light , Doubt not , my lord and gracious sovereign , But Tamburlaine and that Tartarian rout [ 11 ] Shall either perish by our warlike hands , Or plead for mercy at your highness ' feet .
Go , stout Theridamas ; thy words are swords , And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes.I long to see thee back return from thence , That I may view these milk-white steeds of mineAll loaden with the heads of killed men , And , from their knees even to their hoofs below , Besmear 'd with blood that makes a dainty show .
Then now , my lord , I humbly take my leave .
Theridamas , farewell ten thousand times. [ Exit THERIDAMAS. ] Ah , Menaphon , why stay'st thou thus behind , When other men press [ 12 ] forward for renown ? Go , Menaphon , go into Scythia , And foot by foot follow Theridamas .
Nay , pray you , [ 13 ] let him stay ; a greater [ task ] Fits Menaphon than warring with a thief : Create him pro-rex of all [ 14 ] Africa , That he may win the Babylonians ' hearts , Which will revolt from Persian government , Unless they have a wiser king than you .
Unless they have a wiser king than you ! These are his words ; Meander , set them down .
And add this to them , -- that all AsiaLament to see the folly of their king .
Well , here I swear by this my royal seat --
You may do well to kiss it , then .
Emboss 'd with silk as best beseems my state , To be reveng 'd for these contemptuous words ! O , where is duty and allegiance now ? Fled to the Caspian or the Ocean main ? What shall I call thee ? brother ? no , a foe ; Monster of nature , shame unto thy stock , That dar'st presume thy sovereign for to mock ! -- Meander , come : I am abus 'd , Meander. [ Exeunt all except COSROE and MENAPHON . ]
How now , my lord ! what , mated [ 15 ] and amaz'dTo hear the king thus threaten like himself !
Ah , Menaphon , I pass not [ 16 ] for his threats ! The plot is laid by Persian noblemenAnd captains of the Median garrisonsTo crown me emperor of Asia : But this it is that doth excruciateThe very substance of my vexed soul , To see our neighbours , that were wont to quakeAnd tremble at the Persian monarch 's name , Now sit and laugh our regiment [ 17 ] to scorn ; And that which might resolve [ 18 ] me into tears , Men from the farthest equinoctial lineHave swarm 'd in troops into the Eastern India , Lading their ships [ 19 ] with gold and precious stones , And made their spoils from all our provinces .
This should entreat your highness to rejoice , Since Fortune gives you opportunityTo gain the title of a conquerorBy curing of this maimed empery.Afric and Europe bordering on your land , And continent to your dominions , How easily may you , with a mighty host , Pass [ 20 ] into Graecia , as did Cyrus once , And cause them to withdraw their forces home , Lest you [ 21 ] subdue the pride of Christendom ! [ Trumpet within . ]
But , Menaphon , what means this trumpet 's sound ?
Behold , my lord , Ortygius and the restBringing the crown to make you emperor ! Re-enter ORTYGIUS and CENEUS , [ 22 ] with others , bearing acrown .
Magnificent and mighty prince Cosroe , We , in the name of other Persian states [ 23 ] And commons of this mighty monarchy , Present thee with th ' imperial diadem .
The warlike soldiers and the gentlemen , That heretofore have fill 'd PersepolisWith Afric captains taken in the field , Whose ransom made them march in coats of gold , With costly jewels hanging at their ears , And shining stones upon their lofty crests , Now living idle in the walled towns , Wanting both pay and martial discipline , Begin in troops to threaten civil war , And openly exclaim against their [ 24 ] king : Therefore , to stay all sudden mutinies , We will invest your highness emperor ; Whereat the soldiers will conceive more joyThan did the Macedonians at the spoilOf great Darius and his wealthy host .
Well , since I see the state of Persia droopAnd languish in my brother 's government , I willingly receive th ' imperial crown , And vow to wear it for my country 's good , In spite of them shall malice my estate .
And , in assurance of desir 'd success , We here do crown thee monarch of the East [ ; ] Emperor of Asia and Persia ; [ 25 ] Great lord of Media and Armenia ; Duke of Africa and Albania , Mesopotamia and of Parthia , East India and the late-discover 'd isles ; Chief lord of all the wide vast Euxine Sea , And of the ever-raging [ 26 ] Caspian Lake .
[ 27 ] Long live Cosroe , mighty emperor !
And Jove may [ 28 ] never let me longer liveThan I may seek to gratify your love , And cause the soldiers that thus honour meTo triumph over many provinces ! By whose desires of discipline in armsI doubt not shortly but to reign sole king , And with the army of Theridamas ( Whither we presently will fly , my lords , ) To rest secure against my brother 's force .
We knew , [ 29 ] my lord , before we brought the crown , Intending your investion so nearThe residence of your despised brother , The lords [ 30 ] would not be too exasperateTo injury [ 31 ] or suppress your worthy title ; Or , if they would , there are in readinessTen thousand horse to carry you from hence , In spite of all suspected enemies .
I know it well , my lord , and thank you all .
Sound up the trumpets , then. [ Trumpets sounded . ]
[ 32 ] God save the king ! [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter TAMBURLAINE leading ZENOCRATE , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE , AGYDAS , MAGNETES , LORDS , and SOLDIERS loaden with treasure .
Come , lady , let not this appal your thoughts ; The jewels and the treasure we have ta'enShall be reserv 'd , and you in better stateThan if you were arriv 'd in Syria , Even in the circle of your father 's arms , The mighty Soldan of Aegyptia .
Ah , shepherd , pity my distressed plight ! ( If , as thou seem'st , thou art so mean a man , ) And seek not to enrich thy followersBy lawless rapine from a silly maid , Who , travelling [ 33 ] with these Median lordsTo Memphis , from my uncle 's country of Media , Where , all my youth , I have been governed , Have pass 'd the army of the mighty Turk , Bearing his privy-signet and his handTo safe-conduct us thorough [ 34 ] Africa .
And , since we have arriv 'd in Scythia , Besides rich presents from the puissant Cham , We have his highness ' letters to commandAid and assistance , if we stand in need .
But now you see these letters and commandsAre countermanded by a greater man ; And through my provinces you must expectLetters of conduct from my mightiness , If you intend to keep your treasure safe.But , since I love to live at liberty , As easily may you get the Soldan 's crownAs any prizes out of my precinct ; For they are friends that help to wean my stateTill men and kingdoms help to strengthen it , And must maintain my life exempt from servitude. -- But , tell me , madam , is your grace betroth 'd ?
I am , my lord , -- for so you do import .
I am a lord , for so my deeds shall prove ; And yet a shepherd by my parentage.But , lady , this fair face and heavenly hueMust grace his bed that conquers Asia , And means to be a terror to the world , Measuring the limits of his emperyBy east and west , as Phoebus doth his course. -- Lie here , ye weeds , that I disdain to wear ! This complete armour and this curtle-axeAre adjuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine. -- And , madam , whatsoever you esteemOf this success , and loss unvalued , [ 35 ] Both may invest you empress of the East ; And these that seem but silly country swainsMay have the leading of so great an hostAs with their weight shall make the mountains quake , Even as when windy exhalations , Fighting for passage , tilt within the earth .
As princely lions , when they rouse themselves , Stretching their paws , and threatening herds of beasts , So in his armour looketh Tamburlaine.Methinks I see kings kneeling at his feet , And he with frowning brows and fiery looksSpurning their crowns from off their captive heads .
And making thee and me , Techelles , kings , That even to death will follow Tamburlaine .
Nobly resolv 'd , sweet friends and followers ! These lords perhaps do scorn our estimates , And think we prattle with distemper 'd spirits : But , since they measure our deserts so mean , That in conceit [ 36 ] bear empires on our spears , Affecting thoughts coequal with the clouds , They shall be kept our forced followersTill with their eyes they view us emperors .
The gods , defenders of the innocent.Will never prosper your intended drifts , That thus oppress poor friendless passengers.Therefore at least admit us liberty , Even as thou hop'st to be eternizedBy living Asia 's mighty emperor .
I hope our lady 's treasure and our ownMay serve for ransom to our liberties : Return our mules and empty camels back , That we may travel into Syria , Where her betrothed lord , Alcidamus , Expects the arrival of her highness ' person .
And wheresoever we repose ourselves , We will report but well of Tamburlaine .
Disdains Zenocrate to live with me ? Or you , my lords , to be my followers ? Think you I weigh this treasure more than you ? Not all the gold in India 's wealthy armsShall buy the meanest soldier in my train.Zenocrate , lovelier than the love of Jove , Brighter than is the silver Rhodope , [ 37 ] Fairer than whitest snow on Scythian hills , Thy person is more worth to TamburlaineThan the possession of the Persian crown , Which gracious stars have promis 'd at my birth.A hundred Tartars shall attend on thee , Mounted on steeds swifter than Pegasus ; Thy garments shall be made of Median silk , Enchas 'd with precious jewels of mine own , More rich and valurous [ 38 ] than Zenocrate 's ; With milk-white harts upon an ivory sledThou shalt be drawn amidst the frozen pools , [ 39 ] And scale the icy mountains ' lofty tops , Which with thy beauty will be soon resolv 'd : [ 40 ] My martial prizes , with five hundred men , Won on the fifty-headed Volga 's waves , Shall we all offer [ 41 ] to Zenocrate , And then myself to fair Zenocrate .
What now ! in love ?
Techelles , women must be flattered : But this is she with whom I am in [ 42 ] love.Enter a SOLDIER .
News , news !
How now ! what 's the matter ?
A thousand Persian horsemen are at hand , Sent from the king to overcome us all .
How now , my lords of Egypt , and Zenocrate ! Now must your jewels be restor 'd again , And I , that triumph 'd [ 43 ] so , be overcome ? How say you , lordings ? is not this your hope ?
We hope yourself will willingly restore them .
Such hope , such fortune , have the thousand horse.Soft ye , my lords , and sweet Zenocrate ! You must be forced from me ere you go. -- A thousand horsemen ! we five hundred foot ! An odds too great for us to stand against.But are they rich ? and is their armour good !
Their plumed helms are wrought with beaten gold , Their swords enamell 'd , and about their necksHang massy chains of gold down to the waist ; In every part exceeding brave [ 44 ] and rich .
Then shall we fight courageously with them ? Or look you I should play the orator ?
No ; cowards and faint-hearted runawaysLook for orations when the foe is near : Our swords shall play the orators for us .
Come , let us meet them at the mountain-top , [ 45 ] And with a sudden and an hot alarumDrive all their horses headlong down the hill .
Come , let us march .
Stay , Techelles ; ask a parle first.The SOLDIERS enter.Open the mails , [ 46 ] yet guard the treasure sure : Lay out our golden wedges to the view , That their reflections may amaze the Persians ; And look we friendly on them when they come : But , if they offer word or violence , We 'll fight , five hundred men-at-arms to one , Before we part with our possession ; And 'gainst the general we will lift our swords , And either lance [ 47 ] his greedy thirsting throat , Or take him prisoner , and his chain shall serveFor manacles till he be ransom 'd home .
I hear them come : shall we encounter them ?
Keep all your standings , and not stir a foot : Myself will bide the danger of the brunt.Enter THERIDAMAS with others .
Where is this [ 48 ] Scythian Tamburlaine ?
Whom seek'st thou , Persian ? I am Tamburlaine .
Tamburlaine ! A Scythian shepherd so embellishedWith nature 's pride and richest furniture ! His looks do menace heaven and dare the gods ; His fiery eyes are fix 'd upon the earth , As if he now devis 'd some stratagem , Or meant to pierce Avernus ' darksome vaults [ 49 ] To pull the triple-headed dog from hell .
Noble and mild this Persian seems to be , If outward habit judge the inward man .
His deep affections make him passionate .
Not Hermes , prolocutor to the gods , Could use persuasions more pathetical .
Nor are Apollo 's oracles more trueThan thou shalt find my vaunts substantial .
We are his friends ; and , if the Persian kingShould offer present dukedoms to our state , We think it loss to make exchange for thatWe are assur 'd of by our friend 's success .
And kingdoms at the least we all expect , Besides the honour in assured conquests , Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords , And hosts of soldiers stand amaz 'd at us , When with their fearful tongues they shall confess , These are the men that all the world admires .
What strong enchantments tice my yielding soulTo these [ 59 ] resolved , noble Scythians ! But shall I prove a traitor to my king ?
No ; but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine .
Won with thy words , and conquer 'd with thy looks , I yield myself , my men , and horse to thee , To be partaker of thy good or ill , As long as life maintains Theridamas .
Theridamas , my friend , take here my hand , Which is as much as if I swore by heaven , And call 'd the gods to witness of my vow.Thus shall my heart be still combin 'd with thineUntil our bodies turn to elements , And both our souls aspire celestial thrones. -- Techelles and Casane , welcome him .
Welcome , renowmed [ 60 ] Persian , to us all !
Long may Theridamas remain with us !
These are my friends , in whom I more rejoiceThan doth the king of Persia in his crown ; And , by the love of Pylades and Orestes , Whose statues [ 61 ] we adore in Scythia , Thyself and them shall never part from meBefore I crown you kings [ 62 ] in Asia.Make much of them , gentle Theridamas , And they will never leave thee till the death .
Nor thee nor them , [ 63 ] thrice-noble Tamburlaine , Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierc 'd , To do you honour and security .
A thousand thanks , worthy Theridamas. -- And now , fair madam , and my noble lords , If you will [ 64 ] willingly remain with me , You shall have honours as your merits be ; Or else you shall be forc 'd with slavery .
We yield unto thee , happy Tamburlaine .
For you , then , madam , I am out of doubt .
I must be pleas 'd perforce , -- wretched Zenocrate ! [ Exeunt. ] ACT II.SCENE I.Enter COSROE , MENAPHON , ORTYGIUS , and CENEUS , with SOLDIERS .
Thus far are we towards Theridamas , And valiant Tamburlaine , the man of fame , The man that in the forehead of his fortuneBears figures of renown and miracle.But tell me , that hast seen him , Menaphon , What stature wields he , and what personage ?
Well hast thou pourtray 'd in thy terms of lifeThe face and personage of a wondrous man : Nature doth strive with Fortune [ 69 ] and his starsTo make him famous in accomplish 'd worth ; And well his merits shew him to be madeHis fortune 's master and the king of men , That could persuade , at such a sudden pinch , With reasons of his valour and his life , A thousand sworn and overmatching foes.Then , when our powers in points of swords are join 'd , And clos 'd in compass of the killing bullet , Though strait the passage and the port [ 70 ] be madeThat leads to palace of my brother 's life , Proud is [ 71 ] his fortune if we pierce it not ; And , when the princely Persian diademShall overweigh his weary witless head , And fall , like mellow 'd fruit , with shakes of death , In fair [ 72 ] Persia noble TamburlaineShall be my regent , and remain as king .
In happy hour we have set the crownUpon your kingly head , that seeks our honourIn joining with the man ordain 'd by heavenTo further every action to the best .
He that with shepherds and a little spoilDurst , in disdain of wrong and tyranny , Defend his freedom 'gainst a monarchy , What will he do supported by a king , Leading a troop of gentlemen and lords , And stuff 'd with treasure for his highest thoughts !
And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.Our army will be forty thousand strong , When Tamburlaine and brave TheridamasHave met us by the river Araris ; And all conjoin 'd to meet the witless king , That now is marching near to Parthia , And , with unwilling soldiers faintly arm 'd , To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine ; To whom , sweet Menaphon , direct me straight .
I will , my lord. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter MYCETES , MEANDER , with other LORDS ; and SOLDIERS .
Come , my Meander , let us to this gear.I tell you true , my heart is swoln with wrathOn this same thievish villain Tamburlaine , And of [ 73 ] that false Cosroe , my traitorous brother.Would it not grieve a king to be so abus 'd , And have a thousand horsemen ta'en away ? And , which is worse , [ 74 ] to have his diademSought for by such scald knaves as love him not ? I think it would : well , then , by heavens I swear , Aurora shall not peep out of her doors , But I will have Cosroe by the head , And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.Tell you the rest , Meander : I have said .
An hundred horsemen of my company , Scouting abroad upon these champion [ 79 ] plains , Have view 'd the army of the Scythians ; Which make report it far exceeds the king 's .
Suppose they be in number infinite , Yet being void of martial discipline , All running headlong , greedy after [ 80 ] spoils , And more regarding gain than victory , Like to the cruel brothers of the earth , Sprung [ 81 ] of the teeth of [ 82 ] dragons venomous , Their careless swords shall lance [ 83 ] their fellows ' throats , And make us triumph in their overthrow .
Was there such brethren , sweet Meander , say , That sprung of teeth of dragons venomous ?
So poets say , my lord .
And 't is a pretty toy to be a poet.Well , well , Meander , thou art deeply read ; And having thee , I have a jewel sure.Go on , my lord , and give your charge , I say ; Thy wit will make us conquerors to-day .
Then , noble soldiers , to entrap these thievesThat live confounded in disorder 'd troops , If wealth or riches may prevail with them , We have our camels laden all with gold , Which you that be but common soldiersShall fling in every corner of the field ; And , while the base-born Tartars take it up , You , fighting more for honour than for gold , Shall massacre those greedy-minded slaves ; And , when their scatter 'd army is subdu 'd , And you march on their slaughter 'd carcasses , Share equally the gold that bought their lives , And live like gentlemen in Persia.Strike up the [ 84 ] drum , and march courageously : Fortune herself doth sit upon our crests .
He tells you true , my masters ; so he does. -- Drums , why sound ye not when Meander speaks ? [ Exeunt , drums sounding. ] SCENE III.Enter COSROE , TAMBURLAINE , THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE , and ORTYGIUS , with others .
Now , worthy Tamburlaine , have I repos'dIn thy approved fortunes all my hope.What think'st thou , man , shall come of our attempts ? For , even as from assured oracle , I take thy doom for satisfaction .
And so mistake you not a whit , my lord ; For fates and oracles [ of ] heaven have swornTo royalize the deeds of Tamburlaine , And make them blest that share in his attempts : And doubt you not but , if you favour me , And let my fortunes and my valour swayTo some [ 85 ] direction in your martial deeds , The world will [ 86 ] strive with hosts of men-at-armsTo swarm unto the ensign I support.The host of Xerxes , which by fame is saidTo drink the mighty Parthian Araris , Was but a handful to that we will have : Our quivering lances , shaking in the air , And bullets , like Jove 's dreadful thunderbolts , Enroll 'd in flames and fiery smouldering mists , Shall threat the gods more than Cyclopian wars ; And with our sun-bright armour , as we march , We 'll chase the stars from heaven , and dim their eyesThat stand and muse at our admired arms .
You see , my lord , what working words he hath ; But , when you see his actions top [ 87 ] his speech , Your speech will stay , or so extol his worthAs I shall be commended and excus'dFor turning my poor charge to his direction : And these his two renowmed [ 88 ] friends , my lord , Would make one thirst [ 89 ] and strive to be retain'dIn such a great degree of amity .
With duty and [ 90 ] with amity we yieldOur utmost service to the fair [ 91 ] Cosroe .
Which I esteem as portion of my crown.Usumcasane and Techelles both , When she [ 92 ] that rules in Rhamnus ' [ 93 ] golden gates , And makes a passage for all prosperous arms , Shall make me solely emperor of Asia , Then shall your meeds [ 94 ] and valours be advanc'dTo rooms of honour and nobility .
Then haste , Cosroe , to be king alone , That I with these my friends and all my menMay triumph in our long-expected fate.The king , your brother , is now hard at hand : Meet with the fool , and rid your royal shouldersOf such a burden as outweighs the sandsAnd all the craggy rocks of Caspia.Enter a MESSENGER .
My lord , We have discovered the enemyReady to charge you with a mighty army .
Come , Tamburlaine ; now whet thy winged sword , And lift thy lofty arm into [ 95 ] the clouds , That it may reach the king of Persia 's crown , And set it safe on my victorious head .
See where it is , the keenest curtle-axeThat e'er made passage thorough Persian arms ! These are the wings shall make it fly as swiftAs doth the lightning or the breath of heaven , And kill as sure [ 96 ] as it swiftly flies .
Thy words assure me of kind success : Go , valiant soldier , go before , and chargeThe fainting army of that foolish king .
Usumcasane and Techelles , come : We are enow to scare the enemy , And more than needs to make an emperor. [ Exeunt to the battle. ] SCENE IV.Enter MYCETES with his crown in his hand. [ 97 ]
Accurs 'd be he that first invented war ! They knew not , ah , they knew not , simple men , How those were [ 98 ] hit by pelting cannon-shotStand staggering [ 99 ] like a quivering aspen-leafFearing the force of Boreas ' boisterous blasts ! In what a lamentable case were I , If nature had not given me wisdom 's lore ! For kings are clouts that every man shoots at , Our crown the pin [ 100 ] that thousands seek to cleave : Therefore in policy I think it goodTo hide it close ; a goodly stratagem , And far from any man that is a fool : So shall not I be known ; or if I be , They can not take away my crown from me.Here will I hide it in this simple hole.Enter TAMBURLAINE .
What , fearful coward , straggling from the camp , When kings themselves are present in the field ?
Thou liest .
Base villain , darest thou give me [ 101 ] the lie ?
Away ! I am the king ; go ; touch me not.Thou break'st the law of arms , unless thou kneel , And cry me `` mercy , noble king ! ''
Are you the witty king of Persia ?
Ay , marry , [ 102 ] am I : have you any suit to me ?
I would entreat you to speak but three wise words .
So I can when I see my time .
Is this your crown ?
Ay : didst thou ever see a fairer ?
You will not sell it , will you ?
Such another word , and I will have thee executed. Come , give it me .
No ; I took it prisoner .
You lie ; I gave it you .
Then 't is mine .
No ; I mean I let you keep it .
Well , I mean you shall have it again.Here , take it for a while : I lend it thee , Till I may see thee hemm 'd with armed men ; Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head : Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine. [ Exit . ]
O gods , is this Tamburlaine the thief ? I marvel much he stole it not away. [ Trumpets within sound to the battle : he runs out. ] SCENE V.Enter COSROE , TAMBURLAINE , MENAPHON , MEANDER , ORTYGIUS , THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE , with others .
Hold thee , Cosroe ; wear two imperial crowns ; Think thee invested now as royally , Even by the mighty hand of Tamburlaine , As if as many kings as could encompass theeWith greatest pomp had crown 'd thee emperor .
So do I , thrice-renowmed man-at-arms ; [ 103 ] And none shall keep the crown but Tamburlaine : Thee do I make my regent of Persia , And general-lieutenant of my armies. -- Meander , you , that were our brother 's guide , And chiefest [ 104 ] counsellor in all his acts , Since he is yielded to the stroke of war , On your submission we with thanks excuse , And give you equal place in our affairs .
Most happy [ 105 ] emperor , in humblest termsI vow my service to your majesty , With utmost virtue of my faith and duty .
Thanks , good Meander. -- Then , Cosroe , reign , And govern Persia in her former pomp.Now send embassage to thy neighbour kings , And let them know the Persian king is chang 'd , From one that knew not what a king should do , To one that can command what 'longs thereto.And now we will to fair PersepolisWith twenty thousand expert soldiers.The lords and captains of my brother 's campWith little slaughter take Meander 's course , And gladly yield them to my gracious rule. -- Ortygius and Menaphon , my trusty friends , Now will I gratify your former good , And grace your calling with a greater sway .
And as we ever aim 'd [ 106 ] at your behoof , And sought your state all honour it [ 107 ] deserv 'd , So will we with our powers and our [ 108 ] livesEndeavour to preserve and prosper it .
I will not thank thee , sweet Ortygius ; Better replies shall prove my purposes. -- And now , Lord Tamburlaine , my brother 's campI leave to thee and to Theridamas , To follow me to fair Persepolis ; Then will we [ 109 ] march to all those Indian minesMy witless brother to the Christians lost , And ransom them with fame and usury : And , till thou overtake me , Tamburlaine , ( Staying to order all the scatter 'd troops , ) Farewell , lord regent and his happy friends.I long to sit upon my brother 's throne .
Your majesty shall shortly have your wish , And ride in triumph through Persepolis. [ Exeunt all except TAMBURLAINE , THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , and
]
And ride in triumph through Persepolis ! -- Is it not brave to be a king , Techelles ? -- Usumcasane and Theridamas , Is it not passing brave to be a king , And ride in triumph through Persepolis ?
O , my lord , it is sweet and full of pomp !
To be a king is half to be a god .
A god is not so glorious as a king : I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven , Can not compare with kingly joys in [ 110 ] earth ; -- To wear a crown enchas 'd with pearl and gold , Whose virtues carry with it life and death ; To ask and have , command and be obey 'd ; When looks breed love , with looks to gain the prize , -- Such power attractive shines in princes ' eyes .
Why , say , Theridamas , wilt thou be a king ?
Nay , though I praise it , I can live without it .
What say my other friends ? will you be kings ?
I , if I could , with all my heart , my lord .
Why , that 's well said , Techelles : so would I ; -- And so would you , my masters , would you not ?
What , then , my lord ?
Why , then , Casane , [ 111 ] shall we wish for aughtThe world affords in greatest novelty , And rest attemptless , faint , and destitute ? Methinks we should not. I am strongly mov 'd , That if I should desire the Persian crown , I could attain it with a wondrous ease : And would not all our soldiers soon consent , If we should aim at such a dignity ?
I know they would with our persuasions .
Why , then , Theridamas , I 'll first assayTo get the Persian kingdom to myself ; Then thou for Parthia ; they for Scythia and Media ; And , if I prosper , all shall be as sureAs if the Turk , the Pope , Afric , and Greece , Came creeping to us with their crowns a-piece. [ 112 ]
Then shall we send to this triumphing king , And bid him battle for his novel crown ?
Nay , quickly , then , before his room be hot .
'Twill prove a pretty jest , in faith , my friends .
A jest to charge on twenty thousand men ! I judge the purchase [ 113 ] more important far .
Judge by thyself , Theridamas , not me ; For presently Techelles here shall hasteTo bid him battle ere he pass too far , And lose more labour than the gain will quite : [ 114 ] Then shalt thou see this [ 115 ] Scythian TamburlaineMake but a jest to win the Persian crown. -- Techelles , take a thousand horse with thee , And bid him turn him [ 116 ] back to war with us , That only made him king to make us sport : We will not steal upon him cowardly , But give him warning and [ 117 ] more warriors : Haste thee , Techelles ; we will follow thee. [ Exit TECHELLES. ] What saith Theridamas ?
Go on , for me. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE VI.Enter COSROE , MEANDER , ORTYGIUS , and MENAPHON , with
What means this devilish shepherd , to aspireWith such a giantly presumption , To cast up hills against the face of heaven , And dare the force of angry Jupiter ? But , as he thrust them underneath the hills , And press 'd out fire from their burning jaws , So will I send this monstrous slave to hell , Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul .
Some powers divine , or else infernal , mix'dTheir angry seeds at his conception ; For he was never sprung [ 118 ] of human race , Since with the spirit of his fearful pride , He dares [ 119 ] so doubtlessly resolve of rule , And by profession be ambitious .
What god , or fiend , or spirit of the earth , Or monster turned to a manly shape , Or of what mould or mettle he be made , What star or fate [ 120 ] soever govern him , Let us put on our meet encountering minds ; And , in detesting such a devilish thief , In love of honour and defence of right , Be arm 'd against the hate of such a foe , Whether from earth , or hell , or heaven he grow .
Nobly resolv 'd , my good Ortygius ; And , since we all have suck 'd one wholesome air , And with the same proportion of elementsResolve , [ 121 ] I hope we are resembled , Vowing our loves to equal death and life.Let 's cheer our soldiers to encounter him , That grievous image of ingratitude , That fiery thirster after sovereignty , And burn him in the fury of that flameThat none can quench but blood and empery.Resolve , my lords and loving soldiers , nowTo save your king and country from decay.Then strike up , drum ; and all the stars that makeThe loathsome circle of my dated life , Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart , That thus opposeth him against the gods , And scorns the powers that govern Persia ! [ Exeunt , drums sounding. ] SCENE VII.Alarms of battle within. Then enter COSROE wounded , TAMBURLAINE , THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE , with others .
Barbarous [ 122 ] and bloody Tamburlaine , Thus to deprive me of my crown and life ! -- Treacherous and false Theridamas , Even at the morning of my happy state , Scarce being seated in my royal throne , To work my downfall and untimely end ! An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul ; And death arrests the organ of my voice , Who , entering at the breach thy sword hath made , Sacks every vein and artier [ 123 ] of my heart. -- Bloody and insatiate Tamburlaine !
The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown , That caus 'd the eldest son of heavenly OpsTo thrust his doting father from his chair , And place himself in the empyreal heaven , Mov 'd me to manage arms against thy state.What better precedent than mighty Jove ? Nature , that fram 'd us of four elementsWarring within our breasts for regiment , [ 124 ] Doth teach us all to have aspiring minds : Our souls , whose faculties can comprehendThe wondrous architecture of the world , And measure every wandering planet 's course , Still climbing after knowledge infinite , And always moving as the restless spheres , Will us to wear ourselves , and never rest , Until we reach the ripest fruit [ 125 ] of all , That perfect bliss and sole felicity , The sweet fruition of an earthly crown .
And that made me to join with Tamburlaine ; For he is gross and like the massy earthThat moves not upwards , nor by princely deedsDoth mean to soar above the highest sort .
And that made us , the friends of Tamburlaine , To lift our swords against the Persian king .
For as , when Jove did thrust old Saturn down , Neptune and Dis gain 'd each of them a crown , So do we hope to reign in Asia , If Tamburlaine be plac 'd in Persia .
The strangest men that ever nature made ! I know not how to take their tyrannies.My bloodless body waxeth chill and cold , And with my blood my life slides through my wound ; My soul begins to take her flight to hell , And summons all my senses to depart : The heat and moisture , which did feed each other , For want of nourishment to feed them both , Are [ 126 ] dry and cold ; and now doth ghastly DeathWith greedy talents [ 127 ] gripe my bleeding heart , And like a harpy [ 128 ] tires on my life. -- Theridamas and Tamburlaine , I die : And fearful vengeance light upon you both ! [ Dies. -- TAMBURLAINE takes COSROE 'S crown , and puts it onhis own head . ]
Not all the curses which the [ 129 ] Furies breatheShall make me leave so rich a prize as this.Theridamas , Techelles , and the rest , Who think you now is king of Persia ?
Tamburlaine ! Tamburlaine !
Though Mars himself , the angry god of arms , And all the earthly potentates conspireTo dispossess me of this diadem , Yet will I wear it in despite of them , As great commander of this eastern world , If you but say that Tamburlaine shall reign .
Long live Tamburlaine , and reign in Asia !
So ; now it is more surer on my headThan if the gods had held a parliament , And all pronounc 'd me king of Persia. [ Exeunt. ] ACT III.SCENE I.Enter BAJAZETH , the KINGS OF FEZ , MOROCCO , and ARGIER , withothers , in great pomp .
Great kings of Barbary , and my portly bassoes , [ 130 ] We hear the Tartars and the eastern thieves , Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine , Presume a bickering with your emperor , And think to rouse us from our dreadful siegeOf the famous Grecian Constantinople.You know our army is invincible ; As many circumcised Turks we have , And warlike bands of Christians renied , [ 131 ] As hath the ocean or the Terrene [ 132 ] seaSmall drops of water when the moon beginsTo join in one her semicircled horns : Yet would we not be brav 'd with foreign power , Nor raise our siege before the Grecians yield , Or breathless lie before the city-walls.KING OF FEZ. Renowmed [ 133 ] emperor and mighty general , What , if you sent the bassoes of your guardTo charge him to remain in Asia , Or else to threaten death and deadly armsAs from the mouth of mighty Bajazeth ?
Hie thee , my basso , [ 134 ] fast to Persia ; Tell him thy lord , the Turkish emperor , Dread lord of Afric , Europe , and Asia , Great king and conqueror of Graecia , The ocean , Terrene , and the Coal-black sea , The high and highest monarch of the world , Wills and commands , ( for say not I entreat , ) Not [ 135 ] once to set his foot in [ 136 ] Africa , Or spread [ 137 ] his colours in Graecia , Lest he incur the fury of my wrath : Tell him I am content to take a truce , Because I hear he bears a valiant mind : But if , presuming on his silly power , He be so mad to manage arms with me , Then stay thou with him , -- say , I bid thee so ; And if , before the sun have measur 'd heaven [ 138 ] With triple circuit , thou regreet us not , We mean to take his morning 's next ariseFor messenger he will not be reclaim 'd , And mean to fetch thee in despite of him .
Most great and puissant monarch of the earth , Your basso will accomplish your behest , And shew your pleasure to the Persian , As fits the legate of the stately Turk. [ Exit. ] KING OF ARGIER. They say he is the king of Persia ; But , if he dare attempt to stir your siege , 'Twere requisite he should be ten times more , For all flesh quakes at your magnificence .
True , Argier ; and tremble [ s ] at my looks.KING OF MOROCCO. The spring is hinder 'd by your smothering host ; For neither rain can fall upon the earth , Nor sun reflex his virtuous beams thereon , The ground is mantled with such multitudes .
All this is true as holy Mahomet ; And all the trees are blasted with our breaths.KING OF FEZ. What thinks your greatness best to be achiev'dIn pursuit of the city 's overthrow ?
I will the captive pioners [ 139 ] of ArgierCut off the water that by leaden pipesRuns to the city from the mountain Carnon ; Two thousand horse shall forage up and down , That no relief or succour come by land ; And all the sea my galleys countermand : Then shall our footmen lie within the trench , And with their cannons , mouth 'd like Orcus ' gulf , Batter the walls , and we will enter in ; And thus the Grecians shall be conquered. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter ZENOCRATE , AGYDAS , ANIPPE , with others .
Madam Zenocrate , may I presumeTo know the cause of these unquiet fitsThat work such trouble to your wonted rest ? 'T is more than pity such a heavenly faceShould by heart 's sorrow wax so wan and pale , When your offensive rape by Tamburlaine ( Which of your whole displeasures should be most ) Hath seem 'd to be digested long ago .
Although it be digested long ago , As his exceeding favours have deserv 'd , And might content the Queen of Heaven , as wellAs it hath chang 'd my first-conceiv 'd disdain ; Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughtsWith ceaseless [ 140 ] and disconsolate conceits , [ 141 ] Which dye my looks so lifeless as they are , And might , if my extremes had full events , Make me the ghastly counterfeit [ 142 ] of death .
Eternal heaven sooner be dissolv 'd , And all that pierceth Phoebus ' silver eye , Before such hap fall to Zenocrate !
Ah , life and soul , still hover in his [ 143 ] breast , And leave my body senseless as the earth , Or else unite you [ 144 ] to his life and soul , That I may live and die with Tamburlaine ! Enter , behind , TAMBURLAINE , with TECHELLES , and others .
With Tamburlaine ! Ah , fair Zenocrate , Let not a man so vile and barbarous , That holds you from your father in despite , And keeps you from the honours of a queen , ( Being suppos 'd his worthless concubine , ) Be honour 'd with your love but for necessity ! So , now the mighty Soldan hears of you , Your highness needs not doubt but in short timeHe will , with Tamburlaine 's destruction , Redeem you from this deadly servitude .
Leave [ 145 ] to wound me with these words , And speak of Tamburlaine as he deserves : The entertainment we have had of himIs far from villany or servitude , And might in noble minds be counted princely .
How can you fancy one that looks so fierce , Only dispos 'd to martial stratagems ? Who , when he shall embrace you in his arms , Will tell how many thousand men he slew ; And , when you look for amorous discourse , Will rattle forth his facts [ 146 ] of war and blood , Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears .
As looks the sun through Nilus ' flowing stream , Or when the Morning holds him in her arms , So looks my lordly love , fair Tamburlaine ; His talk much [ 147 ] sweeter than the Muses ' songThey sung for honour 'gainst Pierides , [ 148 ] Or when Minerva did with Neptune strive : And higher would I rear my estimateThan Juno , sister to the highest god , If I were match 'd with mighty Tamburlaine .
Yet be not so inconstant in your love , But let the young Arabian [ 149 ] live in hope , After your rescue to enjoy his choice.You see , though first the king of Persia , Being a shepherd , seem 'd to love you much , Now , in his majesty , he leaves those looks , Those words of favour , and those comfortings , And gives no more than common courtesies .
Thence rise the tears that so distain my cheeks , Fearing his love [ 150 ] through my unworthiness. [ TAMBURLAINE goes to her , and takes her away lovingly bythe hand , looking wrathfully on AGYDAS , and says nothing.Exeunt all except AGYDAS . ]
Betray 'd by fortune and suspicious love , Threaten 'd with frowning wrath and jealousy , Surpris 'd with fear of [ 151 ] hideous revenge , I stand aghast ; but most astoniedTo see his choler shut in secret thoughts , And wrapt in silence of his angry soul : Upon his brows was pourtray 'd ugly death ; And in his eyes the fury [ 152 ] of his heart , That shone [ 153 ] as comets , menacing revenge , And cast a pale complexion on his cheeks.As when the seaman sees the HyadesGather an army of Cimmerian clouds , ( Auster and Aquilon with winged steeds , All sweating , tilt about the watery heavens , With shivering spears enforcing thunder-claps , And from their shields strike flames of lightning , ) All-fearful folds his sails , and sounds the main , Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aidAgainst the terror of the winds and waves ; So fares Agydas for the late-felt frowns , That send [ 154 ] a tempest to my daunted thoughts , And make my soul divine her overthrow.Re-enter TECHELLES with a naked dagger , and USUMCASANE .
See you , Agydas , how the king salutes you ! He bids you prophesy what it imports .
I prophesied before , and now I proveThe killing frowns of jealousy and love.He needed not with words confirm my fear , For words are vain where working tools presentThe naked action of my threaten 'd end : It says , Agydas , thou shalt surely die , And of extremities elect the least ; More honour and less pain it may procure , To die by this resolved hand of thineThan stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.Then haste , Agydas , and prevent the plaguesWhich thy prolonged fates may draw on thee : Go wander free from fear of tyrant 's rage , Removed from the torments and the hellWherewith he may excruciate thy soul ; And let Agydas by Agydas die , And with this stab slumber eternally. [ Stabs himself . ]
Usumcasane , see , how right the manHath hit the meaning of my lord the king !
Faith , and , Techelles , it was manly done ; And , since he was so wise and honourable , Let us afford him now the bearing hence , And crave his triple-worthy burial .
Agreed , Casane ; we will honour him. [ Exeunt , bearing out the body. ] SCENE III.Enter TAMBURLAINE , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE , THERIDAMAS , a BASSO , ZENOCRATE , ANIPPE , with others .
Basso , by this thy lord and master knowsI mean to meet him in Bithynia : See , how he comes ! tush , Turks are full of brags , And menace [ 155 ] more than they can well perform.He meet me in the field , and fetch [ 156 ] thee hence ! Alas , poor Turk ! his fortune is too weakT ' encounter with the strength of Tamburlaine : View well my camp , and speak indifferently ; Do not my captains and my soldiers lookAs if they meant to conquer Africa ?
Your men are valiant , but their number few , And can not terrify his mighty host : My lord , the great commander of the world , Besides fifteen contributory kings , Hath now in arms ten thousand janizaries , Mounted on lusty Mauritanian steeds , Brought to the war by men of Tripoly ; Two hundred thousand footmen that have serv'dIn two set battles fought in Graecia ; And for the expedition of this war , If he think good , can from his garrisonsWithdraw as many more to follow him .
The more he brings , the greater is the spoil ; For , when they perish by our warlike hands , We mean to set [ 157 ] our footmen on their steeds , And rifle all those stately janizars .
But will those kings accompany your lord ?
Such as his highness please ; but some must stayTo rule the provinces he late subdu 'd .
[ To his OFFICERS ] Then fight courageously : their crowns are yours ; This hand shall set them on your conquering heads , That made me emperor of Asia .
Let him bring millions infinite of men , Unpeopling Western Africa and Greece , Yet we assure us of the victory .
Even he , that in a trice vanquish 'd two kingsMore mighty than the Turkish emperor , Shall rouse him out of Europe , and pursueHis scatter 'd army till they yield or die .
Well said , Theridamas ! speak in that mood ; For WILL and SHALL best fitteth Tamburlaine , Whose smiling stars give him assured hopeOf martial triumph ere he meet his foes.I that am term 'd the scourge and wrath of God , The only fear and terror of the world , Will first subdue the Turk , and then enlargeThose Christian captives which you keep as slaves , Burdening their bodies with your heavy chains , And feeding them with thin and slender fare ; That naked row about the Terrene [ 158 ] sea , And , when they chance to rest or breathe [ 159 ] a space , Are punish 'd with bastones [ 160 ] so grievouslyThat they [ 161 ] lie panting on the galleys ' side , And strive for life at every stroke they give.These are the cruel pirates of Argier , That damned train , the scum of Africa , Inhabited with straggling runagates , That make quick havoc of the Christian blood : But , as I live , that town shall curse the timeThat Tamburlaine set foot in Africa.Enter BAJAZETH , BASSOES , the KINGS OF FEZ , MOROCCO , and ARGIER ; ZABINA and EBEA .
Bassoes and janizaries of my guard , Attend upon the person of your lord , The greatest potentate of Africa .
Techelles and the rest , prepare your swords ; I mean t ' encounter with that Bajazeth .
Kings of Fez , Morocco , [ 162 ] and Argier , He calls me Bajazeth , whom you call lord ! Note the presumption of this Scythian slave ! -- I tell thee , villain , those that lead my horseHave to their names titles [ 163 ] of dignity ; And dar'st thou bluntly call me Bajazeth ?
And know , thou Turk , that those which lead my horseShall lead thee captive thorough Africa ; And dar'st thou bluntly call me Tamburlaine ?
By Mahomet my kinsman 's sepulchre , And by the holy Alcoran I swear , He shall be made a chaste and lustless eunuch , And in my sarell [ 164 ] tend my concubines ; And all his captains , that thus stoutly stand , Shall draw the chariot of my emperess , Whom I have brought to see their overthrow !
By this my sword that conquer 'd Persia , Thy fall shall make me famous through the world ! I will not tell thee how I 'll [ 165 ] handle thee , But every common soldier of my campShall smile to see thy miserable state.KING OF FEZ. What means the [ 166 ] mighty Turkish emperor , To talk with one so base as Tamburlaine ? KING OF MOROCCO. Ye Moors and valiant men of Barbary.How can ye suffer these indignities ? KING OF ARGIER. Leave words , and let them feel your lances'points , Which glided through the bowels of the Greeks .
Well said , my stout contributory kings ! Your threefold army and my hugy [ 167 ] hostShall swallow up these base-born Persians .
Puissant , renowm 'd , [ 168 ] and mighty Tamburlaine , Why stay we thus prolonging of [ 169 ] their lives ?
I long to see those crowns won by our swords , That we may rule [ 170 ] as kings of Africa .
What coward would not fight for such a prize ?
Fight all courageously , and be you kings : I speak it , and my words are oracles .
Zabina , mother of three braver [ 171 ] boysThan Hercules , that in his infancyDid pash [ 172 ] the jaws of serpents venomous ; Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike lance , Their shoulders broad for complete armour fit , Their limbs more large and of a bigger sizeThan all the brats y-sprung [ 173 ] from Typhon 's loins ; Who , when they come unto their father 's age , Will batter turrets with their manly fists ; -- Sit here upon this royal chair of state , And on thy head wear my imperial crown , Until I bring this sturdy TamburlaineAnd all his captains bound in captive chains .
Such good success happen to Bajazeth !
Zenocrate , the loveliest maid alive , Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone , The only paragon of Tamburlaine ; Whose eyes are brighter than the lamps of heaven , And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony ; That with thy looks canst clear the darken 'd sky , And calm the rage of thundering Jupiter ; Sit down by her , adorned with my crown , As if thou wert the empress of the world.Stir not , Zenocrate , until thou seeMe march victoriously with all my men , Triumphing over him and these his kings , Which I will bring as vassals to thy feet ; Till then , take thou my crown , vaunt of my worth , And manage words with her , as we will arms .
And may my love , the king of Persia , Return with victory and free from wound !
Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms , Which lately made all Europe quake for fear.I have of Turks , Arabians , Moors , and Jews , Enough to cover all Bithynia : Let thousands die ; their slaughter 'd carcassesShall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest ; And as the heads of Hydra , so my power , Subdu 'd , shall stand as mighty as before : If they should yield their necks unto the sword , Thy soldiers ' arms could not endure to strikeSo many blows as I have heads for them. [ 174 ] Thou know'st not , foolish-hardy Tamburlaine , What 't is to meet me in the open field , That leave no ground for thee to march upon .
Our conquering swords shall marshal us the wayWe use to march upon the slaughter 'd foe , Trampling their bowels with our horses ' hoofs , Brave horses bred on the [ 175 ] white Tartarian hillsMy camp is like to Julius Caesar 's host , That never fought but had the victory ; Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot warAs these , my followers , willingly would have.Legions of spirits , fleeting in the air , Direct our bullets and our weapons ' points , And make your strokes to wound the senseless light ; [ 176 ] And when she sees our bloody colours spread , Then Victory begins to take her flight , Resting herself upon my milk-white tent. -- But come , my lords , to weapons let us fall ; The field is ours , the Turk , his wife , and all. [ Exit with his followers . ]
Come , kings and bassoes , let us glut our swords , That thirst to drink the feeble Persians ' blood. [ Exit with his followers . ]
Base concubine , must thou be plac 'd by meThat am the empress of the mighty Turk ?
Disdainful Turkess , and unreverend boss , [ 177 ] Call'st thou me concubine , that am betroth'dUnto the great and mighty Tamburlaine ?
To Tamburlaine , the great Tartarian thief !
Thou wilt repent these lavish words of thineWhen thy great basso-master and thyselfMust plead for mercy at his kingly feet , And sue to me to be your advocate. [ 178 ]
And sue to thee ! I tell thee , shameless girl , Thou shalt be laundress to my waiting-maid. -- How lik'st thou her , Ebea ? will she serve ?
Madam , she thinks perhaps she is too fine ; But I shall turn her into other weeds , And make her dainty fingers fall to work .
Hear'st thou , Anippe , how thy drudge doth talk ? And how my slave , her mistress , menaceth ? Both for their sauciness shall be employ'dTo dress the common soldiers ' meat and drink ; For we will scorn they should come near ourselves .
Yet sometimes let your highness send for themTo do the work my chambermaid disdains. [ They sound to the battle within . ]
Ye gods and powers that govern Persia , And made my lordly love her worthy king , Now strengthen him against the Turkish Bajazeth , And let his foes , like flocks of fearful roesPursu 'd by hunters , fly his angry looks , That I may see him issue conqueror !
Now , Mahomet , solicit God himself , And make him rain down murdering shot from heaven , To dash the Scythians ' brains , and strike them dead , That dare [ 179 ] to manage arms with himThat offer 'd jewels to thy sacred shrineWhen first he warr 'd against the Christians ! [ They sound again to the battle within . ]
By this the Turks lie weltering in their blood , And Tamburlaine is lord of Africa .
Thou art deceiv'd. I heard the trumpets soundAs when my emperor overthrew the Greeks , And led them captive into Africa.Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves ; Prepare thyself to live and die my slave .
If Mahomet should come from heaven and swearMy royal lord is slain or conquered , Yet should he not persuade me otherwiseBut that he lives and will be conqueror.Re-enter BAJAZETH , pursued by TAMBURLAINE. [ 180 ]
Now , king of bassoes , who is conqueror ?
Thou , by the fortune of this damned foil. [ 181 ]
Where are your stout contributory kings ? Re-enter TECHELLES , THERIDAMAS , and USUMCASANE .
We have their crowns ; their bodies strow the field .
Each man a crown ! why , kingly fought , i'faith.Deliver them into my treasury .
Now let me offer to my gracious lordHis royal crown again so highly won .
Nay , take the Turkish crown from her , Zenocrate , And crown me emperor of Africa .
No , Tamburlaine ; though now thou gat [ 182 ] the best , Thou shalt not yet be lord of Africa .
Give her the crown , Turkess , you were best. [ Takes it from her . ]
Injurious villains , thieves , runagates , How dare you thus abuse my majesty ?
Here , madam , you are empress ; she is none. [ Gives it to ZENOCRATE . ]
Not now , Theridamas ; her time is past : The pillars , that have bolster 'd up those terms , Are faln in clusters at my conquering feet .
Though he be prisoner , he may be ransom 'd .
Not all the world shall ransom Bajazeth .
Ah , fair Zabina ! we have lost the field ; And never had the Turkish emperorSo great a foil by any foreign foe.Now will the Christian miscreants be glad , Ringing with joy their superstitious bells , And making bonfires for my overthrow : But , ere I die , those foul idolatersShall make me bonfires with their filthy bones ; For , though the glory of this day be lost , Afric and Greece have garrisons enoughTo make me sovereign of the earth again .
Those walled garrisons will I subdue , And write myself great lord of Africa : So from the East unto the furthest WestShall Tamburlaine extend his puissant arm.The galleys and those pilling [ 183 ] brigandines , That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf , And hover in the Straits for Christians ' wreck , Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant , Until the Persian fleet and men-of-war , Sailing along the oriental sea , Have fetch 'd about the Indian continent , Even from Persepolis to Mexico , And thence unto the Straits of Jubalter ; Where they shall meet and join their force in one.Keeping in awe the Bay of Portingale , And all the ocean by the British [ 184 ] shore ; And by this means I 'll win the world at last .
Yet set a ransom on me , Tamburlaine .
What , think'st thou Tamburlaine esteems thy gold ? I 'll make the kings of India , ere I die , Offer their mines , to sue for peace , to me , And dig for treasure to appease my wrath. -- Come , bind them both , and one lead in the Turk ; The Turkess let my love 's maid lead away , [ They bind them . ]
Ah , villains , dare you touch my sacred arms ? -- O Mahomet ! O sleepy Mahomet !
O cursed Mahomet , that mak'st us thusThe slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous !
Come , bring them in ; and for this happy conquestTriumph , and solemnize a martial [ 185 ] feast. [ Exeunt. ] ACT IV.SCENE I.Enter the SOLDAN OF EGYPT , CAPOLIN , LORDS , and a MESSENGER .
Awake , ye men of Memphis ! [ 186 ] hear the clangOf Scythian trumpets ; hear the basilisks , [ 187 ] That , roaring , shake Damascus ' turrets down ! The rogue of Volga holds Zenocrate , The Soldan 's daughter , for his concubine , And , with a troop of thieves and vagabonds , Hath spread his colours to our high disgrace , While you , faint-hearted base Egyptians , Lie slumbering on the flowery banks of Nile , As crocodiles that unaffrighted restWhile thundering cannons rattle on their skins .
Nay , mighty Soldan , did your greatness seeThe frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine , That with his terror and imperious eyesCommands the hearts of his associates , It might amaze your royal majesty .
Villain , I tell thee , were that TamburlaineAs monstrous [ 188 ] as Gorgon prince of hell , The Soldan would not start a foot from him.But speak , what power hath he ?
Mighty lord , Three hundred thousand men in armour clad , Upon their prancing steeds , disdainfullyWith wanton paces trampling on the ground ; Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot , Shaking their swords , their spears , and iron bills , Environing their standard round , that stoodAs bristle-pointed as a thorny wood ; Their warlike engines and munitionExceed the forces of their martial men .
Nay , could their numbers countervail the stars , Or ever-drizzling [ 189 ] drops of April showers , Or wither 'd leaves that autumn shaketh down , Yet would the Soldan by his conquering powerSo scatter and consume them in his rage , That not a man should [ 190 ] live to rue their fall .
So might your highness , had you time to sortYour fighting men , and raise your royal host ; But Tamburlaine by expeditionAdvantage takes of your unreadiness .
Let him take all th ' advantages he can : Were all the world conspir 'd to fight for him , Nay , were he devil , [ 191 ] as he is no man , Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate , Whom he detaineth in despite of us , This arm should send him down to Erebus , To shroud his shame in darkness of the night .
Pleaseth your mightiness to understand , His resolution far exceedeth all.The first day when he pitcheth down his tents , White is their hue , and on his silver crestA snowy feather spangled-white he bears , To signify the mildness of his mind , That , satiate with spoil , refuseth blood : But , when Aurora mounts the second time , As red as scarlet is his furniture ; Then must his kindled wrath be quench 'd with blood , Not sparing any that can manage arms : But , if these threats move not submission , Black are his colours , black pavilion ; His spear , his shield , his horse , his armour , plumes , And jetty feathers , menace death and hell ; Without respect of sex , degree , or age , He razeth all his foes with fire and sword .
Merciless villain , peasant , ignorantOf lawful arms or martial discipline ! Pillage and murder are his usual trades : The slave usurps the glorious name of war.See , Capolin , the fair Arabian king , [ 192 ] That hath been disappointed by this slaveOf my fair daughter and his princely love , May have fresh warning to go war with us , And be reveng 'd for her disparagement. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter TAMBURLAINE , TECHELLES , THERIDAMAS , USUMCASANE , ZENOCRATE , ANIPPE , two MOORS drawing BAJAZETH in a cage , and ZABINA following him .
Bring out my footstool. [ They take BAJAZETH out of the cage . ]
Ye holy priests of heavenly Mahomet , That , sacrificing , slice and cut your flesh , Staining his altars with your purple blood , Make heaven to frown , and every fixed starTo suck up poison from the moorish fens , And pour it [ 193 ] in this glorious tyrant 's throat !
The chiefest god , first mover of that sphereEnchas 'd with thousands ever-shining lamps , Will sooner burn the glorious frame of heavenThan it should [ 194 ] so conspire my overthrow.But , villain , thou that wishest this [ 195 ] to me , Fall prostrate on the low disdainful earth , And be the footstool of great Tamburlaine , That I may rise into [ 196 ] my royal throne .
First shalt thou rip my bowels with thy sword , And sacrifice my heart [ 197 ] to death and hell , Before I yield to such a slavery .
Base villain , vassal , slave to Tamburlaine , Unworthy to embrace or touch the groundThat bears the honour of my royal weight ; Stoop , villain , stoop ! stoop ; [ 198 ] for so he bidsThat may command thee piecemeal to be torn , Or scatter 'd like the lofty cedar-treesStruck with the voice of thundering Jupiter .
Then , as I look down to the damned fiends , Fiends , look on me ! and thou , dread god of hell , With ebon sceptre strike this hateful earth , And make it swallow both of us at once ! [ TAMBURLAINE gets up on him into his chair . ]
Unworthy king , that by thy crueltyUnlawfully usurp'st the Persian seat , Dar'st thou , that never saw an emperorBefore thou met my husband in the field , Being thy captive , thus abuse his state , Keeping his kingly body in a cage , That roofs of gold and sun-bright palacesShould have prepar 'd to entertain his grace ? And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet , Whose feet the kings [ 202 ] of Africa have kiss 'd ?
You must devise some torment worse , my lord , To make these captives rein their lavish tongues .
Zenocrate , look better to your slave .
She is my handmaid 's slave , and she shall lookThat these abuses flow not from [ 203 ] her tongue. -- Chide her , Anippe .
Let these be warnings , then , for you , [ 204 ] my slave , How you abuse the person of the king ; Or else I swear to have you whipt stark nak'd. [ 205 ]
Great Tamburlaine , great in my overthrow , Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low , For treading on the back of Bajazeth , That should be horsed on four mighty kings .
Thy names , and titles , and thy dignities [ 206 ] Are fled from Bajazeth , and remain with me , That will maintain it 'gainst a world of kings. -- Put him in again. [ They put him into the cage . ]
Is this a place for mighty Bajazeth ? Confusion light on him that helps thee thus !
Your tents of white now pitch 'd before the gates , And gentle flags of amity display 'd , I doubt not but the governor will yield , Offering Damascus to your majesty .
So shall he have his life , and all the rest : But , if he stay until the bloody flagBe once advanc 'd on my vermilion tent , He dies , and those that kept us out so long ; And , when they see me march in black array , With mournful streamers hanging down their heads , Were in that city all the world contain 'd , Not one should scape , but perish by our swords .
Yet would you have some pity for my sake , Because it is my country [ 213 ] and my father 's .
Not for the world , Zenocrate , if I have sworn. -- Come ; bring in the Turk. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE III.Enter SOLDAN , KING OF ARABIA , [ 214 ] CAPOLIN , and SOLDIERS , with streaming colours .
I have , and sorrow for his bad success ; But , noble lord of great Arabia , Be so persuaded that the Soldan isNo more dismay 'd with tidings of his fall , Than in the haven when the pilot stands , And views a stranger 's ship rent in the winds , And shivered against a craggy rock : Yet in compassion to his wretched state , A sacred vow to heaven and him I make , Confirming it with Ibis ' holy name , [ 219 ] That Tamburlaine shall rue the day , the [ 220 ] hour , Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrongUnto the hallow 'd person of a prince , Or kept the fair Zenocrate so long , As concubine , I fear , to feed his lust.KING OF ARABIA. Let grief and fury hasten on revenge ; Let Tamburlaine for his offences feelSuch plagues as heaven and we can pour on him : I long to break my spear upon his crest , And prove the weight of his victorious arm ; For fame , I fear , hath been too prodigalIn sounding through the world his partial praise .
Capolin , hast thou survey 'd our powers ?
Great emperors of Egypt and Arabia , The number of your hosts united is , A hundred and fifty thousand horse , Two hundred thousand foot , brave men-at-arms , Courageous and [ 221 ] full of hardiness , As frolic as the hunters in the chaseOf savage beasts amid the desert woods.KING OF ARABIA. My mind presageth fortunate success ; And , Tamburlaine , my spirit doth foreseeThe utter ruin of thy men and thee .
Then rear your standards ; let your sounding drumsDirect our soldiers to Damascus ' walls. -- Now , Tamburlaine , the mighty Soldan comes , And leads with him the great Arabian king , To dim thy baseness and [ 222 ] obscurity , Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil ; To raze and scatter thy inglorious crewOf Scythians and slavish Persians. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE IV.A banquet set out ; and to it come TAMBURLAINE all inscarlet , ZENOCRATE , THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE , BAJAZETH drawn in his cage , ZABINA , and others .
Now hang our bloody colours by Damascus , Reflexing hues of blood upon their heads , While they walk quivering on their city-walls , Half-dead for fear before they feel my wrath.Then let us freely banquet , and carouseFull bowls of wine unto the god of war , That means to fill your helmets full of gold , And make Damascus ' spoils as rich to youAs was to Jason Colchos ' golden fleece. -- And now , Bajazeth , hast thou any stomach ?
Ay , such a stomach , cruel Tamburlaine , as I couldwillingly feed upon thy blood-raw heart .
Nay , thine own is easier to come by : pluck outthat ; and 'twill serve thee and thy wife. -- Well , Zenocrate , Techelles , and the rest , fall to your victuals .
Fall to , and never may your meat digest ! -- Ye Furies , that can mask [ 223 ] invisible , Dive to the bottom of Avernus ' pool , And in your hands bring hellish poison up , And squeeze it in the cup of Tamburlaine ! Or , winged snakes of Lerna , cast your stings , And leave your venoms in this tyrant 's dish ?
And may this banquet prove as ominousAs Progne 's to th ' adulterous Thracian kingThat fed upon the substance of his child !
My lord , [ 224 ] how can you suffer theseOutrageous curses by these slaves of yours ?
To let them see , divine Zenocrate , I glory in the curses of my foes , Having the power from the empyreal heavenTo turn them all upon their proper heads .
I pray you , give them leave , madam ; this speechis a goodly refreshing for them. [ 225 ]
But , if his highness would let them be fed , it would do them more good .
Sirrah , why fall you not to ? are you so daintilybrought up , you can not eat your own flesh ?
First , legions of devils shall tear thee in pieces .
Villain , knowest thou to whom thou speakest ?
O , let him alone. -- Here ; [ 226 ] eat , sir ; take itfrom [ 227 ] my sword 's point , or I 'll thrust it to thy heart. [ BAJAZETH takes the food , and stamps upon it . ]
He stamps it under his feet , my lord .
Take it up , villain , and eat it ; or I will make theeslice [ 228 ] the brawns of thy arms into carbonadoes and eat them .
Nay , 'twere better he killed his wife , and then sheshall be sure not to be starved , and he be provided for a month'svictual beforehand .
Here is my dagger : despatch her while she is fat ; for , if she live but a while longer , she will fall [ 229 ] into aconsumption with fretting , and then she will not be worth theeating .
Dost thou think that Mahomet will suffer this ?
'T is like he will , when he can not let [ 230 ] it .
Go to ; fall to your meat. What , not a bit ! -- Belikehe hath not been watered to-day : give him some drink. [ They give BAJAZETH water to drink , and he flings it onthe ground. ] Fast , and welcome , sir , while [ 231 ] hunger make you eat. -- How now , Zenocrate ! doth not the Turk and his wife make a goodly show at abanquet ?
Yes , my lord .
Methinks 't is a great deal better than a consort [ 232 ] of music .
Yet music would do well to cheer up Zenocrate.Pray thee , tell why art thou so sad ? if thou wilt have a song , the Turk shall strain his voice : but why is it ?
My lord , to see my father 's town besieg 'd , The country wasted where myself was born , How can it but afflict my very soul ? If any love remain in you , my lord , Or if my love unto your majestyMay merit favour at your highness ' hands , Then raise your siege from fair Damascus ' walls , And with my father take a friendly truce .
Zenocrate , were Egypt Jove 's own land , Yet would I with my sword make Jove to stoop.I will confute those blind geographersThat make a triple region in the world , Excluding regions which I mean to trace , And with this pen [ 233 ] reduce them to a map , Calling the provinces , cities , and towns , After my name and thine , Zenocrate : Here at Damascus will I make the pointThat shall begin the perpendicular : And wouldst thou have me buy thy father 's loveWith such a loss ? tell me , Zenocrate .
Honour still wait on happy Tamburlaine ! Yet give me leave to plead for him , my lord .
Content thyself : his person shall be safe , And all the friends of fair Zenocrate , If with their lives they will be pleas 'd to yield , Or may be forc 'd to make me emperor ; For Egypt and Arabia must be mine. -- Feed , you slave ; thou mayst think thyself happy to be fed frommy trencher .
My empty stomach , full of idle heat , Draws bloody humours from my feeble parts , Preserving life by hastening [ 234 ] cruel death.My veins are pale ; my sinews hard and dry ; My joints benumb 'd ; unless I eat , I die .
Eat , Bajazeth ; let us live in spite of them , lookingsome happy power will pity and enlarge us .
Here , Turk ; wilt thou have a clean trencher ?
Ay , tyrant , and more meat .
Soft , sir ! you must be dieted ; too much eatingwill make you surfeit .
So it would , my lord , 'specially [ 235 ] having so smalla walk and so little exercise. [ A second course is brought in of crowns . ]
Theridamas , Techelles , and Casane , here are thecates you desire to finger , are they not ?
Ay , my lord : but none save kings must feed withthese .
'T is enough for us to see them , and for Tamburlaineonly to enjoy them .
Well ; here is now to the Soldan of Egypt , the Kingof Arabia , and the Governor of Damascus. Now , take these threecrowns , and pledge me , my contributory kings. I crown you here , Theridamas , king of Argier ; Techelles , king of Fez ; andUsumcasane , king of Morocco. [ 236 ] -- How say you to this , Turk ? these arenot your contributory kings .
Nor shall they long be thine , I warrant them .
Kings of Argier , Morocco , and of Fez , You that have march 'd with happy TamburlaineAs far as from the frozen plage [ 237 ] of heavenUnto the watery Morning 's ruddy bower , And thence by land unto the torrid zone , Deserve these titles I endow you withBy valour [ 238 ] and by magnanimity.Your births shall be no blemish to your fame ; For virtue is the fount whence honour springs , And they are worthy she investeth kings .
And , since your highness hath so well vouchsaf 'd , If we deserve them not with higher meedsThan erst our states and actions have retain 'd , Take them away again , [ 239 ] and make us slaves .
Well said , Theridamas : when holy FatesShall stablish me in strong Aegyptia , We mean to travel to th ' antarctic pole , Conquering the people underneath our feet , And be renowm 'd [ 240 ] as never emperors were. -- Zenocrate , I will not crown thee yet , Until with greater honours I be grac'd. [ Exeunt. ] ACT V.SCENE I.Enter the GOVERNOR OF DAMASCUS [ 241 ] with three or fourCITIZENS , and four VIRGINS with branches of laurel intheir hands .
Farewell , sweet virgins , on whose safe returnDepends our city , liberty , and lives. [ Exeunt all except the VIRGINS. ] Enter TAMBURLAINE , all in black and very melancholy , TECHELLES , THERIDAMAS , USUMCASANE , with others .
Virgins , in vain you labour to preventThat which mine honour swears shall be perform'd.Behold my sword ; what see you at the point ? FIRST VIRGIN. Nothing but fear and fatal steel , my lord .
Your fearful minds are thick and misty , then , For there sits Death ; there sits imperious [ 261 ] Death , Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.But I am pleas 'd you shall not see him there ; He now is seated on my horsemen 's spears , And on their points his fleshless body feeds. -- Techelles , straight go charge a few of themTo charge these dames , and shew my servant Death , Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears .
O , pity us !
Away with them , I say , and shew them Death ! [ The VIRGINS are taken out by TECHELLES and others. ] I will not spare these proud Egyptians , Nor change my martial observationsFor all the wealth of Gihon 's golden waves , Or for the love of Venus , would she leaveThe angry god of arms and lie with me.They have refus 'd the offer of their lives , And know my customs are as peremptoryAs wrathful planets , death , or destiny.Re-enter TECHELLES.What , have your horsemen shown the virgins Death ?
They have , my lord , and on Damascus ' wallsHave hoisted up their slaughter 'd carcasses .
[ 269 ] Ay , my lord .
Bring him forth ; and let us know if the town beransacked. [ Exeunt ATTENDANTS. ] Enter TECHELLES , THERIDAMAS , USUMCASANE , and others .
The town is ours , my lord , and fresh supplyOf conquest and of spoil is offer 'd us .
That 's well , Techelles. What 's the news ?
The Soldan and the Arabian king togetherMarch on us with [ 270 ] such eager violenceAs if there were no way but one with us. [ 271 ]
No more there is not , I warrant thee , Techelles.ATTENDANTS bring in BAJAZETH in his cage , followed by
Exeunt ATTENDANTS .
We know the victory is ours , my lord ; But let us save the reverend Soldan 's lifeFor fair Zenocrate that so laments his state .
That will we chiefly see unto , Theridamas , For sweet Zenocrate , whose worthinessDeserves a conquest over every heart. -- And now , my footstool , if I lose the field , You hope of liberty and restitution ? -- Here let him stay , my masters , from the tents , Till we have made us ready for the field. -- Pray for us , Bajazeth ; we are going. [ Exeunt all except BAJAZETH and ZABINA . ]
Go , never to return with victory ! Millions of men encompass thee about , And gore thy body with as many wounds ! Sharp forked arrows light upon thy horse ! Furies from the black Cocytus ' lake , Break up the earth , and with their fire-brandsEnforce thee run upon the baneful pikes ! Vollies of shot pierce through thy charmed skin , And every bullet dipt in poison 'd drugs ! Or roaring cannons sever all thy joints , Making thee mount as high as eagles soar !
Let all the swords and lances in the fieldStick in his breast as in their proper rooms ! At every pore [ 272 ] let blood come dropping forth , That lingering pains may massacre his heart , And madness send his damned soul to hell !
Ah , fair Zabina ! we may curse his power , The heavens may frown , the earth for anger quake ; But such a star hath influence in [ 273 ] his swordAs rules the skies and countermands the godsMore than Cimmerian Styx or Destiny : And then shall we in this detested guise , With shame , with hunger , and with horror stay , [ 274 ] Griping our bowels with retorqued [ 275 ] thoughts , And have no hope to end our ecstasies .
Then is there left no Mahomet , no God , No fiend , no fortune , nor no hope of endTo our infamous , monstrous slaveries.Gape , earth , and let the fiends infernal viewA [ 276 ] hell as hopeless and as full of fearAs are the blasted banks of Erebus , Where shaking ghosts with ever-howling groansHover about the ugly ferryman , To get a passage to Elysium ! [ 277 ] Why should we live ? -- O , wretches , beggars , slaves ! -- Why live we , Bajazeth , and build up nestsSo high within the region of the air , By living long in this oppression , That all the world will see and laugh to scornThe former triumphs of our mightinessIn this obscure infernal servitude ?
Sweet Bajazeth , I will prolong thy lifeAs long as any blood or spark of breathCan quench or cool the torments of my grief. [ Exit . ]
Now , Bajazeth , abridge thy baneful days , And beat the [ 285 ] brains out of thy conquer 'd head , Since other means are all forbidden me , That may be ministers of my decay.O highest lamp of ever-living [ 286 ] Jove , Accursed day , infected with my griefs , Hide now thy stained face in endless night , And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens ! Let ugly Darkness with her rusty coach , Engirt with tempests , wrapt in pitchy clouds , Smother the earth with never-fading mists , And let her horses from their nostrils breatheRebellious winds and dreadful thunder-claps , That in this terror Tamburlaine may live , And my pin 'd soul , resolv 'd in liquid air , May still excruciate his tormented thoughts ! Then let the stony dart of senseless coldPierce through the centre of my wither 'd heart , And make a passage for my loathed life ! [ He brains himself against the cage. ] Re-enter ZABINA .
What do mine eyes behold ? my husband dead ! His skull all riven in twain ! his brains dash 'd out , The brains of Bajazeth , my lord and sovereign ! O Bajazeth , my husband and my lord ! O Bajazeth ! O Turk ! O emperor ! Give him his liquor ? not I. Bring milk and fire , and my bloodI bring him again. -- Tear me in pieces -- give [ 287 ] me the swordwith a ball of wild-fire upon it. -- Down with him ! down withhim ! -- Go to my child ; away , away , away ! ah , save that infant ! save him , save him ! -- I , even I , speak to her. [ 288 ] -- The sun wasdown -- streamers white , red , black -- Here , here , here ! -- Fling themeat in his face -- Tamburlaine , Tamburlaine ! -- Let the soldiers beburied. -- Hell , death , Tamburlaine , [ 289 ] hell ! -- Make ready mycoach , [ 290 ] my chair , my jewels. -- I come , I come , I come ! [ 291 ] [ She runs against the cage , and brains herself. ] Enter ZENOCRATE with ANIPPE .
No breath , nor sense , nor motion , in them both : Ah , madam , this their slavery hath enforc 'd , And ruthless cruelty of Tamburlaine !
Madam , content yourself , and be resolv'dYour love hath Fortune so at his command , That she shall stay , and turn her wheel no more , As long as life maintains his mighty armThat fights for honour to adorn your head.Enter PHILEMUS .
What other heavy news now brings Philemus ?
Madam , your father , and the Arabian king , The first affecter of your excellence , Come [ 296 ] now , as Turnus 'gainst Aeneas did , Armed [ 297 ] with lance into the Aegyptian fields , Ready for battle 'gainst my lord the king .
Too dear a witness for such love , my lord ! Behold Zenocrate , the cursed objectWhose fortunes never mastered her griefs ; Behold her wounded in conceit [ 301 ] for thee , As much as thy fair body is for me ! KING OF ARABIA. Then shall I die with full contented heart , Having beheld divine Zenocrate , Whose sight with joy would take away my lifeAs now it bringeth sweetness to my wound , If I had not been wounded as I am.Ah , that the deadly pangs I suffer nowWould lend an hour 's licence to my tongue , To make discourse of some sweet accidentsHave chanc 'd thy merits in this worthless bondage , And that I might be privy to the stateOf thy deserv 'd contentment and thy love ! But , making now a virtue of thy sight , To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul , Since death denies me further cause of joy , Depriv 'd of care , my heart with comfort dies , Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes. [ Dies. ] Re-enter TAMBURLAINE , leading the SOLDAN ; TECHELLES , THERIDAMAS , USUMCASANE , with others .
Come , happy father of Zenocrate , A title higher than thy Soldan 's name.Though my right hand have [ 302 ] thus enthralled thee , Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free ; She that hath calm 'd the fury of my sword , Which had ere this been bath 'd in streams of bloodAs vast and deep as Euphrates [ 303 ] or Nile .
O sight thrice-welcome to my joyful soul , To see the king , my father , issue safeFrom dangerous battle of my conquering love !
Well met , my only dear Zenocrate , Though with the loss of Egypt and my crown !
Mighty hath God and Mahomet made thy hand , Renowmed [ 310 ] Tamburlaine , to whom all kingsOf force must yield their crowns and emperies ; And I am pleas 'd with this my overthrow , If , as beseems a person of thy state , Thou hast with honour us 'd Zenocrate .
Her state and person want no pomp , you see ; And for all blot of foul inchastity , I record [ 311 ] heaven , her heavenly self is clear : Then let me find no further time [ 312 ] to graceHer princely temples with the Persian crown ; But here these kings that on my fortunes wait , And have been crown 'd for proved worthinessEven by this hand that shall establish them , Shall now , adjoining all their hands with mine , Invest her here the [ 313 ] Queen of PersiaWhat saith the noble Soldan , and Zenocrate ?
I yield with thanks and protestationsOf endless honour to thee for her love .
Then doubt I not [ 314 ] but fair ZenocrateWill soon consent to satisfy us both .
Else [ 315 ] should I much forget myself , my lord .
Then let us set the crown upon her head , That long hath linger 'd for so high a seat .
My hand is ready to perform the deed ; For now her marriage-time shall work us rest .
And here 's the crown , my lord ; help set it on. [ 316 ]
] [ Footnote 96 : sure ] A dissyllable here. In the next line `` assure '' is atrisyllable. ] [ Footnote 97 : with his crown in his hand ] The old eds. add `` offeringto hide it ; '' but THAT he does presently after. ] [ Footnote 98 : those were ] i.e. those who were , who have been. ] [ Footnote 99 : Stand staggering ] So the 8vo. -- The 4to `` Stand THOSEstaggering. '' ] [ Footnote 100 : For kings are clouts that every man shoots at , Our crown the pin , & c.CLOUT means the white mark in the butts ; PIN , the peg in thecentre , which fastened it. ] [ Footnote 101 : me ] So the 4to. -- Omitted in the 8vo. ] [ Footnote 102 : MYCETES. Ay , marry , & c. ] From this to `` TAMBURLAINE. Well , I mean you shall have it again '' inclusive , the dialogue is
M. would read `` Christians RENEGADENS '' or `` CHRISTIAN
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Massacre at Paris , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Posting Date : August 26 , 2008 [ EBook # 1496 ] Release Date : October , 1998
Prince of Navarre my honourable brother , Prince Condy , and my good Lord Admirall , wishe this union and religious league , Knit in these hands , thus joyn 'd in nuptiall rites , May not desolve , till death desolve our lives , And that the native sparkes of princely love , That kindled first this motion in our hearts , May still be feweld in our progenye .
The many favours which your grace has showne , From time to time , but specially in this , Shall binde me ever to your highnes will , In what Queen Mother or your grace commands.QUEENE MOTHER. Thanks sonne Navarre , you see we love you well , That linke you in mariage with our daughter heer : And as you know , our difference in ReligionMight be a meanes to crosse you in your love .
Well Madam , let that rest : And now my Lords the mariage rites perfourm 'd , We think it good to goe and consumateThe rest , with hearing of an holy Masse : Sister , I think your selfe will beare us company.QUEENE MARGARET. I will my good Lord .
The rest that will not goe ( my Lords ) may stay : Come Mother , Let us goe to honor this solemnitie.QUEENE MOTHER. Which Ile desolve with bloud and crueltie. [ Aside. ] Exit [ Charles ] the King , Queene Mother , and [ Margaret ] the Queene of Navar [ with others ] , and manet Navar , the Prince of Condy , and the Lord high Admirall .
Prince Condy and my good Lord Admiral , Now Guise may storme but does us little hurt : Having the King , Queene Mother on our side , To stop the mallice of his envious heart , That seekes to murder all the Protestants : Have you not heard of late how he decreed , If that the King had given consent thereto , That all the protestants that are in Paris , Should have been murdered the other night ?
My Lord I mervaile that th'aspiring GuiseDares once adventure without the Kings assent , To meddle or attempt such dangerous things .
My Lord you need not mervaile at the Guise , For what he doth the Pope will ratifie : In murder , mischeefe , or in tiranny .
But he that sits and rules above the clowdes , Doth heare and see the praiers of the just : And will revenge the bloud of innocents , That Guise hath slaine by treason of his heart , And brought by murder to their timeles ends .
My Lord , but did you mark the CardinallThe Guises brother , and the Duke Dumain : How they did storme at these your nuptiall rites , Because the house of Burbon now comes in , And joynes your lineage to the crowne of France ?
And thats the cause that Guise so frowns at us , And beates his braines to catch us in his trap , Which he hath pitcht within his deadly toyle.Come my Lords lets go to the Church and pray , That God may still defend the right of France : And make his Gospel flourish in this land.Exeunt. [ Scene ii ] Enter the Duke of Guise .
If ever Hymen lowr 'd at marriage rites , And had his alters decks with duskie lightes : If ever sunne stainde heaven with bloudy clowdes , And made it look with terrour on the worlde : If ever day were turnde to ugly night , And night made semblance of the hue of hell , This day , this houre , this fatall night , Shall fully shew the fury of them all.Apothecarie. -- Enter the Pothecarie .
My Lord .
Now shall I prove and guerdon to the ful , The love thou bear'st unto the house of Guise : Where are those perfumed gloves which late I sentTo be poysoned , hast thou done them ? speake , Will every savour breed a pangue of death ?
See where they be my Lord , and he that smellesbut to them , dyes .
Then thou remainest resolute .
I am my Lord , in what your grace commaundes till death .
Thankes my good freend , I wil requite thy love.Goe then , present them to the Queene Navarre : For she is that huge blemish in our eye , That makes these upstart heresies in Fraunce : Be gone my freend , present them to her straite.Souldyer. -- Exit Pothecaier.Enter a Souldier .
My Lord .
Now come thou forth and play thy tragick part , Stand in some window opening neere the street , And when thou seest the Admirall ride by , Discharge thy musket and perfourme his death : And then Ile guerdon thee with store of crownes .
I will my Lord.Exit Souldier .
Maddame , I beseech your grace to except this simple gift.OLD QUEENE. Thanks my good freend , holde , take thou this reward .
I humbly thank your Majestie.Exit Pothecary.OLD QUEENE. Me thinkes the gloves have a very strong perfume , The sent whereof doth make my head to ake .
Doth not your grace know the man that gave them you ? OLD QUEENE. Not wel , but do remember such a man .
Your grace was ill advisde to take them then , Considering of these dangerous times.OLD QUEENE. Help sonne Navarre , I am poysoned.QUEENE MARGARET. The heavens forbid your highnes such mishap .
The late suspition of the Duke of Guise , Might well have moved your highnes to bewareHow you did meddle with such dangerous giftes.QUEENE MARGARET. Too late it is my Lord if that be trueTo blame her highnes , but I hope it beOnly some naturall passion makes her sicke.OLD QUEENE. O no , sweet Margaret , the fatall poysonDoth work within my heart , my brain pan breakes , My heart doth faint , I dye.She dyes .
My Mother poysoned heere before my face : O gracious God , what times are these ? O graunt sweet God my daies may end with hers , That I with her may dye and live againe.QUEENE MARGARET. Let not this heavy chaunce my dearest Lord , ( For whose effects my soule is massacred ) Infect thy gracious brest with fresh supply , To agravate our sodaine miserie .
Come my Lords let us beare her body hence , And see it honoured with just solemnitie.As they are going , [ enter ] the Souldier [ above , who ] dischargethhis musket at the Lord Admirall [ and exit ] .
What are you hurt my Lord high Admiral ?
I my good Lord , shot through the arme .
We are betraide , come my Lords , and let us goe tellthe King of this .
These are the cursed Guisians that doe seeke our death.Oh fatall was this mariage to us all.They beare away the [ olde ] Queene [ of Navarre ] and goe out. [ Scene iv ] Enter [ Charles ] the King , [ Catherine ] the Queene Mother , Duke of Guise , Duke Anjou , Duke Demayne [ and Cossin , Captain of the Kings Guard ] .QUEENE MOTHER. My noble sonne , and princely Duke of Guise , Now have we got the fatall stragling deere , Within the compasse of a deadly toyle , And as we late decreed we may perfourme .
Madam , it wilbe noted through the world , An action bloudy and tirannicall : Cheefely since under safetie of our word , They justly challenge their protection : Besides my heart relentes that noble men , Onely corrupted in religion , Ladies of honor , Knightes and Gentlemen , Should for their conscience taste such rutheles ends .
Though gentle minces should pittie others paines , Yet will the wisest note their proper greefes : And rather seeke to scourge their enemies , Then be themselves base subjects to the whip .
Me thinkes my Lord , Anjoy hath well advisdeYour highnes to consider of the thing , And rather chuse to seek your countries good , Then pittie or releeve these upstart hereticks.QUEENE MOTHER. I hope these reasons mayserve my princely , Sonne , To have some care for feare of enemies .
Well Madam , I referre it to your Majestie , And to my Nephew heere the Duke of Guise : What you determine , I will ratifie.QUEENE MOTHER. Thankes to my princely sonne , then tell me Guise , What order wil you set downe for the Massacre ?
Thus Madame.They that shalbe actors in this Massacre , Shall weare white crosses on their Burgonets , And tye white linnen scarfes about their armes.He that wantes these , and is suspect of heresie , Shall dye , or be he King or Emperour.Then Ile have a peale of ordinance shot from the tower , At which they all shall issue out and set the streetes.And then the watchword being given , a bell shall ring , Which when they heare , they shall begin to kill : And never cease untill that bell shall cease , Then breath a while.Enter the Admirals man .
How now fellow , what newes ?
And it please your grace the Lord high Admirall , Riding the streetes was traiterously shot , And most humbly intreates your MajestieTo visite him sick in his bed .
Messenger , tell him I will see him straite.Exit Messenger.What shall we doe now with the Admirall ? QUEENE MOTHER. Your Majesty had best goe visite him , And make a shew as if all were well .
Content , I will goe visite the Admirall .
And I will goe take order for his death.Exit Guise.Enter the Admirall in his bed .
How fares it with my Lord high Admiral , Hath he been hurt with villaines in the street ? I vow and sweare as I am King of France , To finde and to repay the man with death : With death delay 'd and torments never usde , That durst presume for hope of any gaine , To hurt the noble man his sovereign loves .
Ah my good Lord , these are the Guisians , That seeke to massacre our guiltles lives .
Assure your selfe my good Lord Admirall , I deepely sorrow for your trecherous wrong : And that I am not more secure my selfe , Then I am carefull you should be preserved.Cossin , take twenty of our strongest guarde , And under your direction see they keepAll trecherous violence from our noble freend , Repaying all attempts with present death , Upon the cursed breakers of our peace.And so be pacient good Lord Admirall , And every hower I will visite you.Exeunt omnes. [ Scene v ] Enter Guise , Anjoy , Dumaine , Gonzago , Retes , Montsorrell , andSouldiers to the massacre .
Anjoy , Dumaine , Gonzago , Retes , sweare byThe argent crosses on your burgonets , To kill all that you suspect of heresie .
I sweare by this to be unmercifull .
I am disguisde and none nows who I am , And therfore meane to murder all I meet .
And so will I .
And I .
Away then , break into the Admirals house .
I let the Admirall be first dispatcht .
The Admirall , Cheefe standard bearer to the Lutheranes , Shall in the entrance of this Massacre , Be murdered in his bed.Gonzago conduct them hither , and thenBeset his house that not a man may live .
That charge is mine. Swizers keepe you the streetes , And at ech corner shall the Kings garde stand .
Come sirs follow me.Exit Gonzago and others with him .
Cossin , the Captaine of the Admirals guarde , Plac 'd by my brother , will betray his Lord : Now Guise shall catholiques flourish once againe , The head being of , the members can not stand .
But look my Lord , ther 's some in the Admirals house.Enter [ above Gonzago and others ] into the Admirals house , and he in his bed .
In lucky time , come let us keep this lane , And slay his servants that shall issue out .
Where is the Admirall ?
O let me pray before I dye .
Then pray unto our Ladye , kisse this crosse.Stab him .
O God forgive my sins .
What , is he dead Gonzago ?
I my Lord .
Then throw him down. [ The body is thrown down. Exeunt Gonzago and rest above . ]
Now cosin view him well , It may be it is some other , and he escapte .
Cosin tis he , I know him by his look.See where my Souldier shot him through the arm.He mist him neer , but we have strook him now.Ah base Shatillian and degenerate , Cheef standard bearer to the Lutheranes , Thus in despite of thy Religion , The Duke of Guise stampes on thy liveles bulke.Away with him , cut of his head and handes , And send them for a present to the Pope : And when this just revenge is finished , Unto mount Faucon will we dragge his coarse : And he that living hated so the crosse , Shall being dead , be hangd thereon in chaines .
Anjoy , Gonzago , Retes , if that you three , Will be as resolute as I and Dumaine : There shall not a Hugonet breath in France .
I sweare by this crosse , wee'l not be partiall , But slay as many as we can come neer .
Mountsorrett , go and shoote the ordinance of , That they which have already set the streetMay know their watchword , and then tole the bell , And so lets forward to the Massacre .
I will my Lord.Exit Mountsorrell .
And now my Lords let us closely to our busines .
Anjoy will follow thee .
And so will Dumaine.The ordinance being shot of , the bell tolles .
Come then , lets away.Exeunt.The Guise enters againe , with all the rest , with their Swords drawne , chasing the Protestants .
Tue , tue , tue , Let none escape , murder the Hugonets .
Kill them , kill them.Exeunt.Enter Loreine running , the Guise and the rest pursuing him .
Loreine , Loreine , follow Loreine.. Sirra , Are you a preacher of these heresies ?
I am a preacher of the word of God , And thou a traitor to thy soule and him .
Dearely beloved brother , thus tis written.He stabs him .
Stay my Lord , let me begin the psalme .
Come dragge him away and throw him in a ditch.Exeunt [ omnes ] . [ Scene vi ] Enter Mountsorrell and knocks at Serouns doore.SEROUNS WIFE. Who is't that knocks there ? [ Within . ]
Mountsorrett from the Duke of Guise.SEROUNS WIFE. Husband come down , heer 's one would speak withyou from the Duke of Guise.Enter Seroune .
To speek with me from such a man as he ?
I , I , for this Seroune , and thou shalt ha't.Shewing his dagger .
O let me pray before I take my death .
Despatch then quickly .
O Christ my Saviour --
Christ , villaine ? Why , darst thou presume to call on Christ , Without the intercession of some Saint ? Sanctus Jacobus hee was my Saint , pray to him .
O let me pray unto my God .
Then take this with you.Stab him [ and he falls within and dies ] .Exit. [ Scene vii ] Enter Ramus in his studie .
What fearfull cries come from the river Sene , That fright poore Ramus sitting at his book ? I feare the Guisians have past the bridge , And meane once more to menace me.Enter Taleus .
Flye Ramus flye , if thou wilt save thy life .
Tell me Taleus , wherfore should I flye ?
The Guisians are hard at thy doore , And meane to murder us : Harke , harke they come , Ile leap out at the window. [ Runs out from studie . ]
Sweet Taleus stay.Enter Gonzago and Retes .
Who goes there ?
Tis Taleus , Ramus bedfellow .
What art thou ?
I am as Ramus is , a Christian .
O let him goe , he is a catholick.Exit Taleus.Enter Ramus [ out of his studie ] .
Come Ramus , more golde , or thou shalt have the stabbe .
Alas I am a scholler , how should I have golde ? All that I have is but my stipend from the King , Which is no sooner receiv 'd but it is spent.Enter the Guise and Anjoy [ , Dumaine , Mountsorrell , with soldiers ] .
Whom have you there ?
Tis Ramus , the Kings professor of Logick .
Stab him .
O good my Lord , Wherein hath Ramus been so offencious ?
Marry sir , in having a smack in all , And yet didst never sound any thing to the depth.Was it not thou that scoff'dst the Organon , And said it was a heape of vanities ? He that will be a flat decotamest , And seen in nothing but Epitomies : Is in your judgment thought a learned man.And he forsooth must goe and preach in Germany : Excepting against Doctors actions , And ipse dixi with this quidditie , Argumentum testimonis est in arte partialis.To contradict which , I say Ramus shall dye : How answere you that ? your nego argumentumCannot serve , Sirrah , kill him .
O good my Lord , let me but speak a word .
Well , say on .
Not for my life doe I desire this pause , But in my latter houre to purge my selfe , In that I know the things that I have wrote , Which as I heare one Shekins takes it ill , Because my places being but three , contain all his : I knew the Organon to be confusde , And I reduc 'd it into better forme.And this for Aristotle will I say , That he that despiseth him , can nereBe good in Logick or Philosophie.And thats because the blockish SorbonestsAttribute as much unto their workes , As to the service of the eternall God .
Why suffer you that peasant to declaime ? Stab him I say and send him to his freends in hell .
Nere was there Colliars sonne so full of pride.Kill him. [ Close the studie . ]
My Lord Anjoy , there are a hundred Protestants , Which we have chaste into the river Sene , That swim about and so preserve their lives : How may we doe ? I feare me they will live .
Goe place some men upon the bridge , With bowes and cartes to shoot at them they see , And sinke them in the river as they swim .
Tis well advisde Dumain , goe see it done.Exit Dumaine.And in the mean time my Lord , could we devise , To get those pedantes from the King Navarre , That are tutors to him and the prince of Condy --
For that let me alone , Cousin stay heer , And when you see me in , then follow hard.He knocketh , and enter the King of Navarre and Princeof Condy , with their scholmaisters.How now my Lords , how fare you ?
My Lord , they sayThat all the protestants are massacred .
I , so they are , but yet what remedy : I have done all I could to stay this broile .
But yet my Lord the report doth run , That you were one that made this Massacre .
Who I ? you are deceived , I rose but nowEnter [ to them ] Guise .
Murder the Hugonets , take those pedantes hence .
Thou traitor Guise , lay of thy bloudy hands .
Come let us goe tell the King.Exeunt [ Condy and Navarre ] .
Come sirs , Ile whip you to death with my punniards point.He kils them .
Away with them both.Exit Anjoy [ and soldiers with bodies ] .
And now sirs for this night let our fury stay.Yet will we not the Massacre shall end : Gonzago posse you to Orleance , Retes to Deep , Mountsorrell unto Roan , and spare not oneThat you suspect of heresy. And now stayThat bel that to the devils mattins rings.Now every man put of his burgonet , And so convey him closely to his bed.Exeunt. [ Scene viii ] Enter Anjoy , with two Lords of Poland .
All this and more your highnes shall commaund , For Polands crowne and kingly diadem .
Then come my Lords , lets goe.Exeunt. [ Scene ix ] Enter two with the Admirals body.1. Now sirra , what shall we doe with the Admirall ? 2. Why let us burne him for a heretick.1. O no , his bodye will infect the fire , and the fire the aire , andso we shall be poysoned with him.2. What shall we doe then ? 1. Lets throw him into the river.2. Oh twill corrupt the water , and the water the fish , and thefish our selves when we eate them.1. Then throw him into the ditch.2. No , no , to decide all doubts , be rulde by me , lets hang himupon this tree.1. Agreede.They hang him.Enter the Duke of Guise , and Queene Mother , and theCardinall [ of Loraine ] .
Now Madame , how like you our lusty Admirall ? QUEENE MOTHER. Beleeve me Guise he becomes the place so well , That I could long ere this have wisht him there.But come lets walke aside , th'airs not very sweet .
No by my faith Madam.Sirs , take him away and throw him in some ditch.Carry away the dead body.And now Madam as I understand , There anre a hundred Hugonets and more , Which in the woods doe horde their synagogue : And dayly meet about this time of day , thither will I to put them to the sword.QUEENE MOTHER. Doe so sweet Guise , let us delay no time , For if these straglers gather head againe , And disperse themselves throughout the Realme of France , It will be hard for us to worke their deaths .
Madam , I goe as whirl-winces rage before a storme.Exit Guise.QUEENE MOTHER. My Lord of Loraine have you marks of late , How Charles our sonne begins for to lamentFor the late nights worke which my Lord of GuiseDid make in Paris amongst the Hugonites ?
Madam , I have heard him solemnly vow , With the rebellious King of Navarre , For to revenge their deaths upon us all.QUEENE MOTHER. I , but my Lord , let me alone for that , For Katherine must have her will in France : As I doe live , so surely shall he dye , And Henry then shall weare the diadem.And if he grudge or crosse his Mothers will , Ile disinherite him and all the rest : For Ile rule France , but they shall weare the crowne : And if they storme , I then may pull them downe.Come my Lord let 's goe.Exeunt. [ Scene x ] Enter five or sixe Protestants with bookes , and kneele together.Enter also the Guise [ and others ] .
Downe with the Hugonites , murder them .
O Mounser de Guise , heare me but speake .
No villain , no that toung of thine , That hath blasphemde the holy Church of Rome , Shall drive no plaintes into the Guises eares , To make the justice of my heart relent : Tue , tue , tue , let none escape : Kill them.So , dragge them away.Exeunt. [ Scene xi ] Enter [ Charles ] the King of France , Navar and Epernounestaying him : enter Queene Mother , and the Cardinall [ ofLoraine , and Pleshe ] .
O let me stay and rest me heer a while , A griping paine hath ceasde upon my heart : A sodaine pang , the messenger of death.QUEENE MOTHER. O say not so , thou kill'st thy mothers heart .
I must say so , paine forceth me to complain .
Comfort your selfe my Lord I have no doubt , But God will sure restore you to your health .
O no , my loving brother of Navarre.I have deserv 'd a scourge I must confesse , Yet is there pacience of another sort , Then to misdoe the welfare of their King : God graunt my neerest freends may prove no worse.O horde me up , my sight begins to faire , My sinnewes shrinke , my brain turns upside downe , My heart doth break , I faint and dye.He dies.QUEENE MOTHER. What art thou dead , sweet sonne ? speak to thy Mother.O no , his soule is fled from out his breast , And he nor heares , nor sees us what we doe : My Lords , what resteth now for to be done ? But that we presently despatch EmbassadoursTo Poland , to call Henry back againe , To weare his brothers crowne and dignity.Epernoune , goe see it presently be done , And bid him come without delay to us.Epernoune Madam , I will.Exit Epernoune.QUEENE MOTHER. And now my Lords after these funerals be done , We will with all the speed we can , provideFor Henries coronation from Polonia : Come let us take his body hence.All goe out , but Navarre and Pleshe .
And now Navarre whilste that these broiles doe last , My opportunity may serve me fit , To steale from France , and hye me to my home.For heers no saftie in the Realme for me , And now that Henry is cal 'd from Polland , It is my due by just succession : And therefore as speedily as I can perfourme , Ile muster up an army secretdy , For feare that Guise joyn 'd with the King of Spaine , Might seek to crosse me in mine enterprise.But God that alwaies doth defend the right , Will shew his mercy and preserve us still .
The vertues of our poor Religion , Can not but march with many graces more : Whose army shall discomfort all your foes , And at the length in Pampelonia crowne , In spite of Spaine and all the popish power , That hordes it from your highnesse wrongfully : Your Majestie her rightfull Lord and Soveraigne.Navarre Truth Pleshe , and God so prosper me in all , As I entend to labour for the truth , And true profession of his holy word : Come Pleshe , lets away while time doth serve.Exeunt. [ Scene xii ] Sound Trumpets within , and then all crye vive le Roy two orthree times.Enter Henry crowned : Queene [ Mother ] , Cardinall [ of Loraine ] , Duke of Guise , Epernoone , [ Mugeroun , ] the kings Minions , withothers , and the Cutpurse .
Vive le Roy , vive le Roy.Sound Trumpets.QUEENE MOTHER. Welcome from Poland Henry once agayne , Welcome to France thy fathers royall seate , Heere hast thou a country voice of feares , A warlike people to maintaine thy right , A watchfull Senate for ordaining lawes , A loving mother to preserve thy state , And all things that a King may wish besides : All this and more hath Henry with his crowne .
And long may Henry enjoy all this and more .
Vive le Roy , vive le Roy.Sound trumpets .
Thanks to you al. The guider of all crownes , Graunt that our deeds may wel deserve your loves : And so they shall , if fortune speed my will , And yeeld our thoughts to height of my desertes.What say our Minions , think they Henries heartWill not both harbour love and Majestie ? Put of that feare , they are already joynde , No person , place , or time , or circumstance , Shall slacke my loves affection from his bent.As now you are , so shall you still persist , Remooveles from the favours of your King .
We know that noble minces change not their thoughtsFor wearing of a crowne : in that your grace , Hath worne the Poland diadem , beforeYou were withvested in the crowne of France .
I tell thee Mugeroun we will be freends , And fellowes to , what ever stormes arise .
Then may it please your Majestie to give me leave , To punish those that doe prophane this holy feast.He cuts of the Cutpurse eare , for cutting of the goldebuttons off his cloake .
How meanst thou that ?
O Lord , mine eare .
Come sir , give me my buttons and heers your eare .
Sirra , take him away .
Goe fetch me pen and inke .
I will Madam.Exit Maid .
That I may write unto my dearest Lord.Sweet Mugeroune , tis he that hath my heart , And Guise usurpes it , cause I am his wife : Faine would I finde some means to speak with himBut can not , and therfore am enforst to write , That he may come and meet me in some place , Where we may one injoy the others sight.Enter the Maid with Inke and Paper.So , set it down and leave me to my selfe.O would to God this quill that heere doth write , She writes.Had late been plucks from out faire Cupids wing : That it might print these lines within his heart.Enter the Guise .
What , all alone my love , and writing too : I prethee say to whome thou writes ?
To such a one , as when she reads my lines , Will laugh I feare me at their good aray .
I pray thee let me see .
O no my Lord , a woman only mustPartake the secrets of my heart .
But Madam I must see.He takes it.Are these your secrets that no man must know ?
O pardon me my Lord .
Thou trothles and unjust , what lines are these ? Am I growne olde , or is thy lust growne yong , Or hath my love been so obscurde in thee , That others need to comment on my text ? Is all my love forgot which helde thee deare ? I , dearer then the apple of mine eye ? Is Guises glory but a clowdy mist , In sight and judgement of thy lustfull eye ? Mor du , were not the fruit within thy wombe , On whose encrease I set some longing hope : This wrathfull hand should strike thee to the hartHence strumpet , hide thy head for shame , And fly my presence if thou look'st to live.Exit [ Duchesse ] .O wicked sexe , perjured and unjust , Now doe I see that from the very first , Her eyes and lookes sow 'd seeds of perjury , But villaine he to whom these lines should goe , Shall buy her love even with his dearest bloud.Exit. [ Scene xiv ] Enter the King of Navarre , Pleshe and Bartus , and their train , with drums and trumpets .
Now Lords , since in a quarrell just and right , We undertake to mannage these our warresAgainst the proud disturbers of the faith , I meane the Guise , the Pope , and King of Spaine , Who set themselves to tread us under foot , And rend our true religion from this land : But for you know our quarrell is no more , But to defend their strange inventions , Which they will put us to with sword and fire : We must with resolute minces resolve to fight , In honor of our God and countries good.Spaine is the counsell chamber of the pope , Spaine is the place where he makes peace and warre , And Guise for Spaine hath now incenst the King , To send his power to meet us in the field .
Then in this bloudy brunt they may beholde , The sole endevour of your princely care , To plant the true succession of the faith , In spite of Spaine and all his heresies .
The power of vengeance now implants it selfe , Upon the hauty mountains of my brest : Plaies with her goary coulours of revenge , Whom I respect as leaves of boasting greene , That change their coulour when the winter comes , When I shall vaunt as victor in revenge.Enter a Messenger.How now sirra , what newes ?
My Lord , as by our scoutes we understande , A mighty army comes from France with speed : Which is already mustered in the land , And meanesto meet your highnes in the field .
In Gods name , let them come.This is the Guise that hath incenst the King , To leavy armes and make these civill broyles : But canst thou tell me who is their generall ?
Not yet my Lord , for thereon doe they stay : But as report doth goe , the Duke of JoyeuxHath made great sute unto the King therfore .
It will not countervaile his paines I hope , I would the Guise in his steed might have come , But he doth lurke within his drousie couch , And makes his footstoole on securitie : So he be safe he cares not what becomes , Of King or Country , no not for them both.But come my Lords , let us away with speed , And place our selves in order for the fight.Exeunt. [ Scene xv ] Enter [ Henry ] the King of France , Duke of Guise , Epernoune , and Duke Joyeux .
My sweet Joyeux , I make thee Generall , Of all my army now in readines , To march against the rebellious King Navarre : At thy request I am content thou go'st , Although my love to thee can hardly suffer't , Regarding still the danger of thy life .
Thanks to your Majestie , and so I take my leave.Farwell my Lord of Guise and Epernoune .
Health and harty farwell to my Lord Joyeux.Exit Joyeux .
How kindely Cosin of Guise you and your wifeDoe both salute our lovely Minions.He makes hornes at the Guise.Remember you the letter gentle sir , Which your wife writ to my deare Minion , And her chosen freend ?
How now my Lord , faith this is more then need , Am I to be thus jested at and scornde ? Tis more then kingly or Emperious.And sure if all the proudest kings besideIn Christendome , should beare me such derision , They should know I scornde them and their mockes.I love your Minions ? dote on them your selfe , I know none els but hordes them in disgrace : And heer by all the Saints in heaven I sweare , That villain for whom I beare this deep disgrace , Even for your words that have incenst me so , Shall buy that strumpets favour with his blood , Whether he have dishonoured me or no.Par la mor du , Il mora.Exit .
Beleeve me , Epernoune this jest bites sore .
My Lord , twere good to make them frends , For his othes are seldome spent in vaine.Enter Mugeroun .
How now Mugeroun , metst thou not the Guise at the doore ?
Not I my Lord , what if I had ?
Marry if thou hadst , thou mightst have had the stab , For he hath solemnely sworne thy death .
I may be stabd , and live till he be dead , But wherfore beares he me such deadly hate ?
Because his wife beares thee such kindely love .
If that be all , the next time that I meet her , Ile make her shake off love with her heeles.But which way is he gone ? Ile goe take a walkOn purpose from the Court to meet with him.Exit .
I like not this , come EpernouneLets goe seek the Duke and make them freends.Exeunt. [ Scene xvi ] Alarums within. The Duke Joyeux slaine.Enter the King of Navarre [ , Bartus , ] and his traine .
The Duke is slaine and all his power dispearst , And we are grac 'd with wreathes of victory : Thus God we see doth ever guide the right , To make his glory great upon the earth .
The terrour of this happy victory , I hope will make the King surcease his hate : And either never mannage army more , Or else employ them in some better cause .
How many noble men have lost their lives , In prosecution of these quell armes , Is ruth and almost death to call to mince : Put God we know will alwaies put them downe , That lift themselves against the perfect truth , Which Ile maintaine as long as life doth last : And with the Queene of England joyne my force , To beat the papall Monarck from our lands , And keep those relicks from our countries coastes.Come my Lords , now that the storme is overpass , Let us away with triumph to our tents.Exeunt. [ Scene xvii ] Enter a Souldier .
Sir , to you sir , that dare make the Duke a cuckolde , and use a counterfeite key to his privie Chamber doore : Andalthough you take out nothing but your owne , yet you put inthat which displeaseth him , and so forestall his market , and set upyour standing where you should not : and whereas tree is yourLandlord , you would take upon you to be his , and tyll the groundthat he himself should occupy , which is his own free land. If it benot too free there 's the question : and though I come not to takepossession ( as I would I might ) yet I meane to keepe you out , which I will if this geare horde : what are ye come so soone ? have at ye sir.Enter Mugeroun.He shootes at him and killes him.Enter the Guise [ attended ] .
Holde thee tall Souldier , take thou this and flye.Exit Souldier.Lye there the Kings delight , and Guises scorne.Revenge it Henry as thou list'st or dar'st , I did it only in despite of thee.Take him away.Enter the King and Epernoune .
My Lord of Guise , we understand that youHave gathered a power of men.What your intent is yet we can not learn , But we presume it is not for our good .
Why I am no traitor to the crowne of France.What I have done tis for the Gospel 's sake .
Nay for the Popes sake , and shine owne benefite.What Peere in France but thou ( aspiring Guise ) Durst be in armes without the Kings consent ? I challenge thee for treason in the cause .
Oh base Epernoune , were not his highnes heere , Thou shouldst perceive the Duke of Guise is mov 'd .
Be patient Guise and threat not Epernoune , Least thou perceive the King of France be mov 'd .
Why ? I am a Prince of the Valoyses line , Therfore an enemy to the Burbonites.I am a juror in the holy league , And therfore hated of the Protestants.What should I doe but stand upon my guarde ? And being able , Ile keep an hoast in pay .
Thou able to maintaine an hoast in pay , That livest by forraine exhibition ? The Pope and King of Spaine are thy good frends , Else all France knowes how poor a Duke thou art .
I , those are they that feed him with their golde , To countermaund our will and check our freends .
My Lord , to speak more plainely , thus it is : Being animated by Religious zeale , I meane to muster all the power I can , To overthrow those factious Puritans : And know , the Pope will sell his triple crowne , I , and the catholick Philip King of Spaine , Ere I shall want , will cause his Indians , To rip the golden bowels of America.Navarre that cloakes them underneath his wings , Shall feele the house of Lorayne is his foe : Your highnes need not feare mine armies force , Tis for your safetie and your enemies wrack .
Guise , weare our crowne , and be thou King of France , And as Dictator make or warre or peace , Whilste I cry placet like a Senator.I can not brook thy hauty insolence , Dismisse thy campe or else by our Edict , Be thou proclaimde a traitor throughout France .
The choyse is hard , I must dissemble. [ Aside. ] My Lord , in token of my true humilitie , And simple meaning to your Majestie , I kisse your graces hand , and take my leave , Intending to dislodge my campe with speed .
Then farwell Guise , the King and thou art freends.Exit Guise .
But trust him not my Lord , For had your highnesse seene with what a pompeHe entred Paris , and how the CitizensWith gifts and shewes did entertaine himAnd promised to be at his commaund : Nay , they fear 'd not to speak in the streetes , That Guise ch , durst stand in armes against the King , For not effecting of his holines will .
Did they of Paris entertaine him so ? Then meanes he present treason to our state.Well , let me alone , whose within there ? Enter one with e pen and inke.Make a discharge of all my counsell straite , And Ile subscribe my name and seale it straight.My head shall be my counsell , they are false : And Epernoune I will be rulde by thee .
My Lord , I think for safety of your person , It would be good the Guise were made away , And so to quite your grace of all suspect .
First let us set our hand and seale to this , And then Ile tell thee what I meane to doe.He writes.So , convey this to the counsell presently.Exit one.And Epernoune though I seeme milde and calme , Thinke not but I am tragicall within : Ile secretly convey me unto Bloyse , For now that Paris takes the Guises parse , Heere is not staying for the King of France , Unles he means to be betraide and dye : But as I live , so sure the Guise shall dye.Exeunt. [ Scene xviii ] Enter the King of Navarre reading of a letter , and Bartus .
My Lord , I am advertised from France , That the Guise hath taken armes against the King , And that Paris is revolted from his grace .
Then hath your grace fit oportunitie , To shew your love unto the King of France : Offering him aide against his enemies , Which can not but be thankfully receiv 'd .
Bartus , it shall be so , poast then to Fraunce , And there salute his highnesse in our name , Assure him all the aide we can provide , Against the Guisians and their complices.Bartus be gone , commend me to his grace , And tell him ere it be long , Ile visite him .
I will my Lord.Exit .
Pleshe.Enter Pleshe .
My Lord .
Pleshe , goe muster up our men with speed , And let them march away to France amaine : For we must aide the King against the Guise.Be gone I say , tis time that we were there .
I goe my Lord. [ Exit . ]
That wicked Guise I feare me much will be , The wine of that famous Realme of France : For his aspiring thoughts aime at the crowne , He takes his vantage on Religion , To plant the Pope and popelings in the Realme , And binde it wholy to the Sea of Rome : But if that God doe prosper mine attempts , And send us safely to arrive in France : Wee'l beat him back , and drive him to his death , That basely seekes the wine of his Realme.Exit. [ Scene xix ] Enter the Captaine of the guarde , and three murtherers .
Come on sirs , what , are you resolutely bent , Hating the life and honour of the Guise ? What , will you not feare when you see him come ? 1. Feare him said you ? tush , were he heere , we would kill himpresently.2. O that his heart were leaping in my hand.31. But when will he come that we may murther him ?
Well then , I see you are resolute.1. Let us alone , I warrant you .
Then sirs take your standings within this Chamber , For anon the Guise will come .
You will give us our money ?
I , I , feare not : stand close , be resolute : [ The murtherers go aside as if in the next room. ] Now fals the star whose influence governes France , Whose light was deadly to the Protestants : Now must he fall and perish in his height.Enter the King and Epernoune .
Now Captain of my guarde , are these murtherers ready ?
They be my good Lord .
But are they resolute and armde to kill , Hating the life and honour of the Guise ?
I warrant you my Lord. [ Exit . ]
Then come proud Guise and heere disgordge thy brest , Surchargde with surfet of ambitious thoughts : Breath out that life wherein my death was hid , And end thy endles treasons with thy death.Enter the Guise [ within ] and knocketh .
Holla varlet , hey : Epernoune , where is the King ?
Mounted his royall Cabonet .
I prethee tell him that the Guise is heere .
And please your grace the Duke of Guise doth craveAccesse unto your highnes .
Let him come in.Come Guise and see thy traiterous guile outreacht , And perish in the pit thou mad'st for me.The Guise comes to the King .
Good morrow to your Majestie .
Good morrow to my loving Cousin of Guise.How fares it this morning with your excellence ?
I heard your Majestie was scarcely pleasde , That in the Court I bear so great a traine .
They were to blame that said I was displeasde , And you good Cosin to imagine it.Twere hard with me if I should doubt my kinne , Or be suspicious of my deerest freends : Cousin , assure you I am resolute , Whatever any whisper in mine eares , Not to suspect disloyaltye in thee , And so sweet Cuz farwell.Exit King [ and Epernoune ] .
So , Now sues the King for favour to the Guise , And all his Minions stoup when I commaund : Why this tis to have an army in the fielde.Now by the holy sacrament I sweare , As ancient Romanes over their Captive Lords , So will I triumph over this wanton King , And he shall follow my proud Chariots wheeles.Now doe I but begin to look about , And all my former time was spent in vaine : Holde Sworde , For in thee is the Guises hope.Enter one of the Murtherers.Villaine , why cost thou look so gastly ? speake.3. O pardon me my Lord of Guise .
Pardon thee , why what hast thou done ? 3. O my Lord , I am one of them that is set to murder you .
To murder me , villaine ? 3. I my Lord , the rest have taine their standings in the nextroome , therefore good my Lord goe not foorth .
Yet Caesar shall goe forth.Let mean consaits , and baser men feare death , Tut they are pesants , I am Duke of Guise : And princes with their lookes ingender feare.2 MURD. Stand close , he is comming , I know him by his voice .
As pale as ashes , nay then tis time to look about .
Downe with him , downe with him.They stabbe him .
Oh I have my death wound , give me leave to speak.2. Then pray to God , and aske forgivenes of the King .
Trouble me not , I neare offended him , Nor will I aske forgivenes of the King.Oh that I have not power to stay my life , Nor immortalitie to be reveng 'd : To dye by Pesantes , what a greefe is this ? Ah Sextus , be reveng 'd upon the King , Philip and Parma , I am slaine for you : Pope excommunicate , Philip depose , The wicked branch of curst Valois 's line.Vive la messe , perish Hugonets , Thus Caesar did goe foorth , and thus he dies.He dyes.Enter Captaine of the Guarde .
What , have you done ? Then stay a while and Ile goe call the King , [ Enter King and Epernoune attended. ] But see where he comes.My Lord , see where the Guise is slaine .
My Lord heer is his sonne.Enter the Guises sonne .
Boy , look where your father lyes.YONG GUISE. My father slaine , who hath done this deed ?
Sirra twas I that slew him , and will slayThee too , and thou prove such a traitor.YONG GUISE. Art thou King , and hast done this bloudy deed ? Ile be revengde.He offereth to throwe his dagger .
Away to prison with him , Ile clippe his wingesOr ere he passe my handes , away with him.Exit Boy.But what availeth that this traitors dead , When Duke Dumaine his brother is alive , And that young Cardinall that is growne so proud ? Goe to the Governour of Orleance , And will him in my name to kill the Duke. [ Exit Captaine of the Guarde. ] Get you away and strangle the Cardinall. [ Exit murtherers. ] These two will make one entire Duke of Guise , Especially with our olde mothers helpe .
My Lord , see where she comes , as if she drouptTo heare these newestEnter Queene Mother [ attended ] .
And let her croup , my heart is light enough.Mother , how like you this device of mine ? I slew the Guise , because I would be King.QUEENE MOTHER. King , why so thou wert before.Pray God thou be a King now this is done .
Nay he was King and countermanded me , But now I will be King and rule my selfe , And make the Guisians stoup that are alive.QUEENE MOTHER. I can not speak for greefe : when thou went home , I would that I had murdered thee my sonne.My sonne : thou art a changeling , not my sonne.I curse thee and exclaime thee miscreant , Traitor to God , and to the realme of France .
Cry out , exclaime , houle till thy throat be hoarce , The Guise is slaine , and I rejoyce therefore : And now will I to armes , come Epernoune : And let her greeve her heart out if she will.Exit the King and Epernoune.QUEENE MOTHER. Away , leave me alone to meditate.Sweet Guise , would he had died so thou wert heere : To whom shall I bewray my secrets now , Or who will helpe to builde Religion ? The Protestants will glory and insulte , Wicked Navarre will get the crowne of France , The Popedome can not stand , all goes to wrack , And all for thee my Guise : what may I doe ? But sorrow seaze upon my toyling soule , For since the Guise is dead , I will not live.Exit [ the attendants taking up body of the Guise ] . [ Scene xx ] Enter two [ Murtherers ] dragging in the Cardenall [ of Loraine ] .
Murder me not , I am a Cardenall.1. Wert thou the Pope thou mightst not scape from us .
What , will you fyle your handes with Churchmens bloud ? 2. Shed your bloud , O Lord no : for we entend to strangle you .
Then there is no remedye but I must dye ? 1. No remedye , therefore prepare your selfe .
Yet livesMy brother Duke Dumaine , and many moe : To revenge our deaths upon that cursed King , Upon whose heart may all the furies gripe , And with their pawes drench his black soule in hell.1. Yours my Lord Cardinall , you should have saide.Now they strangle him.So , pluck amaine , He is hard hearted , therfore pull with violence.Come take him away.Exeunt. [ Scene xxi ] Enter Duke Dumayn reading of a letter , with others .
My noble brother murthered by the King , Oh what may I doe , to revenge thy death ? The Kings alone , it can not satisfie.Sweet Duke of Guise our prop to leane upon , Now thou art dead , heere is no stay for us : I am thy brother , and ile revenge thy death , And roote Valois 's line from forth of France , And beate proud Burbon to his native home , That basely seekes to joyne with such a King , Whose murderous thoughts will be his overthrow.Hee wild the Governour of Orleance in his name , That I with speed should have beene put to death.But thats prevented , for to end his life , And all those traitors to the Church of Rome , That durst attempt to murder noble Guise.Enter the Frier .
My Lord , I come to bring you newes , that your brotherthe Cardinall of Loraine by the Kings consent is lately strangledunto death .
My brother Cardenall slaine and I alive ? O wordes of power to kill a thousand men.Come let us away and leavy men , Tis warre that must asswage the tyrantes pride .
My Lord , heare me but speak.I am a Frier of the order of the Jacobyns , that for myconscience sake will kill the King .
But what doth move thee above the rest to doe the deed ?
O my Lord , I have beene a great sinner in my dayes , andthe deed is meritorious .
But how wilt thou get opportunitye ?
Tush my Lord , let me alone for that .
Frier come with me , We will goe talke more of this within.Exeunt. [ Scene xxii ] Sound Drumme and Trumpets , and enter the King of France , and Navarre , Epernoune , Bartus , Pleshe and Souldiers .
Brother of Navarre , I sorrow much , That ever I was prov 'd your enemy , And that the sweet and princely minde you beare , Was ever troubled with injurious warres : I vow as I am lawfull King of France , To recompence your reconciled love , With all the honors and affections , That ever I vouchsafte my dearest freends .
It is enough if that Navarre may beEsteemed faithfull to the King of France : Whose service he may still commaund to death .
Thankes to my Kingly Brother of Navarre.Then there wee'l lye before Lutetia 's walles , Girting this strumpet Cittie with our siege , Till surfeiting with our afflicting armes , She cast her hatefull stomack to the earth.Enter a Messenger .
And it please your Majestie heere is a Frier of theorder of the Jacobins , sent from the President of Paris , thatcraves accesse unto your grace .
Let him come in.Enter Frier with a Letter .
I like not this Friers look.Twere not amisse my Lord , if he were searcht .
Sweete Epernoune , our Friers are holy men , And will not offer violence to their King , For all the wealth and treasure of the world.Frier , thou dost acknowledge me thy King ?
I my good Lord , and will dye therein .
Then come thou neer , and tell what newes thou bringst .
My Lord , The President of Paris greetes your grace , And sends his dutie by these speedye lines , Humblye craving your gracious reply .
Ile read them Frier , and then Ile answere thee .
Sancte Jacobus , now have mercye on me.He stabs the King with a knife as he readeth the letter , andthen the King getteth the knife and killes him .
O my Lord , let him live a while .
No , let the villaine dye , and feele in hell , Just torments for his trechery .
What , is your highnes hurt ?
Yes Navarre , but not to death I hope .
God shield your grace from such a sodaine death : Goe call a surgeon hether strait. [ Exit attendant . ]
What irreligeous Pagans partes be these , Of such as horde them of the holy church ? Take hence that damned villaine from my sight. [ Exeunt attendants with body ]
Ah , had your highnes let him live , We might have punisht him for his deserts .
Sweet Epernoune all Rebels under heaven , Shall take example by his punishment , How they beare armes against their soveraigne.Goe call the English Agent hether strait , Ile send my sister England newes of this , And give her warning of her trecherous foes. [ Enter Surgeon . ]
Pleaseth your grace to let the Surgeon search your wound .
The wound I warrant you is deepe my Lord , Search Surgeon and resolve me what thou seest.The Surgeon searcheth.Enter the English Agent.Agent for England , send thy mistres word , What this detested Jacobin hath done.Tell her for all this that I hope to live , Which if I doe , the Papall Monarck goesTo wrack , an antechristian kingdome falles.These bloudy hands shall teare his triple Crowne , And fire accursed Rome about his eares.Ile fire his erased buildings and incenseThe papall towers to kisse the holy earth.Navarre , give me thy hand , I heere do sweare , To ruinate this wicked Church of Rome , That hatcheth up such bloudy practices.And heere protest eternall love to thee , And to the Queene of England especially , Whom God hath blest for hating Popery .
These words revive my thoughts and comfort me , To see your highnes in this vertuous minde .
Tell me Surgeon , shall I live ?
Alas my Lord , the wound is dangerous , For you are stricken with a poysoned knife .
A poysoned knife ? what , shall the French king dye , Wounded and poysoned , both at once ?
O that that damned villaine were alive againe , That we might torture him with some new found death .
He died a death too good , the devill of hellTorture his wicked soule .
Oh curse him not since he is dead.O the fatall poyson workes within my brest , Tell me Surgeon and flatter not , may I live ?
Alas my Lord , your highnes can not live .
Surgeon , why saist thou so ? the King may live .
Oh no Navarre , thou must be King of France .
Long may you live , and still be King of France .
Or else dye Epernoune .
Sweet Epernoune thy King must dye. My Lords , Fight in the quarrell of this valiant Prince , For he is your lawfull King and my next heire : Valoyses lyne ends in my tragedie.Now let the house of Bourbon weare the crowne , And may it never end in bloud as mine hath done.Weep not sweet Navarre , but revenge my death.Ah Epernoune , is this thy love to me ? Henry thy King wipes of these childish teares , And bids thee whet thy sword on Sextus bones , That it may keenly slice the Catholicks.He loves me not the best that sheds most teares , But he that makes most lavish of his bloud.Fire Paris where these trecherous rebels lurke.I dye Navarre , come beare me to my Sepulchre.Salute the Queene of England in my name , And tell her Henry dyes her faithfull freend.He dyes .
Come Lords , take up the body of the King , That we may see it honourably interde : And then I vow so to revenge his death , That Rome and all those popish Prelates there , Shall curse the time that ere Navarre was King , And rulde in France by Henries fatall death.They march out with the body of the King , lying on fouremens shoulders with a dead march , drawing weapons onthe ground .
End of Project Gutenberg 's Massacre at Paris , by Christopher Marlowe*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MASSACRE AT PARIS ******** This file should be named 1496.txt or 1496.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.﻿Project Gutenberg 's Tamburlaine the Great , Part II. , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Posting Date : August 5 , 2008 [ EBook # 1589 ] Release Date : January , 1998
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT , PART II. ***Produced by Gary R. YoungTAMBURLAINE THE GREAT -- THE SECOND PARTBy Christopher MarloweEdited By The Rev. Alexander DyceCOMMENTS ON THE PREPARATION OF THE E-TEXT : SQUARE BRACKETS : The square brackets , i.e. [ ] are copied from the printed book , without change , except that the stage directions usually do nothave closing brackets. These have been added .
For this E-Text version of the book , the footnotes have beenconsolidated at the end of the play.Numbering of the footnotes has been changed , and each footnoteis given a unique identity in the form [ XXX ] . One aditionalfootnote [ a ] has been inserted.Many of the footnotes refer back to notes to `` The First PartOf Tamburlaine the Great. '' These references have been copiedand inserted into the notes to this play.CHANGES TO THE TEXT : Character names were expanded. For Example , TAMBURLAINE was
, ZENOCRATE was ZENO. , etc.The Second Part of Tamburlaine the Great.Concerning the old eds. , see the prefatory matterto THE FIRST PART. [ a ] THE PROLOGUE.The general welcomes Tamburlaine receiv 'd , When he arrived last upon the [ 1 ] stage , Have made our poet pen his Second Part , Where Death cuts off the progress of his pomp , And murderous Fates throw all his triumphs [ 2 ] down.But what became of fair Zenocrate , And with how many cities ' sacrificeHe celebrated her sad [ 3 ] funeral , Himself in presence shall unfold at large.DRAMATIS PERSONAE.TAMBURLAINE , king of Persia.CALYPHAS , ] AMYRAS , ] his sons.CELEBINUS , ] THERIDAMAS , king of Argier.TECHELLES , king of Fez.USUMCASANE , king of Morocco.ORCANES , king of Natolia.KING OF TREBIZON.KING OF SORIA.KING OF JERUSALEM.KING OF AMASIA.GAZELLUS , viceroy of Byron .
SIGISMUND , King of Hungary.FREDERICK , ] BALDWIN , ] Lords of Buda and Bohemia.CALLAPINE , son to BAJAZETH , and prisoner to TAMBURLAINE.ALMEDA , his keeper.GOVERNOR OF BABYLON.CAPTAIN OF BALSERA.HIS SON.ANOTHER CAPTAIN.MAXIMUS , PERDICAS , Physicians , Lords , Citizens , Messengers , Soldiers , and Attendants.ZENOCRATE , wife to TAMBURLAINE.OLYMPIA , wife to the CAPTAIN OF BALSERA.Turkish Concubines.THE SECOND PART OF TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT.ACT I.SCENE I.Enter ORCANES king of Natolia , GAZELLUS viceroy of Byron , URIBASSA , [ 4 ] and their train , with drums and trumpets .
Egregious viceroys of these eastern parts , Plac 'd by the issue of great Bajazeth , And sacred lord , the mighty Callapine , Who lives in Egypt prisoner to that slaveWhich kept his father in an iron cage , -- Now have we march 'd from fair NatoliaTwo hundred leagues , and on Danubius ' banksOur warlike host , in complete armour , rest , Where Sigismund , the king of Hungary , Should meet our person to conclude a truce : What ! shall we parle with the Christian ? Or cross the stream , and meet him in the field ?
King of Natolia , let us treat of peace : We all are glutted with the Christians ' blood , And have a greater foe to fight against , -- Proud Tamburlaine , that now in Asia , Near Guyron 's head , doth set his conquering feet , And means to fire Turkey as he goes : 'Gainst him , my lord , you must address your power .
Besides , King Sigismund hath brought from ChristendomMore than his camp of stout Hungarians , -- Sclavonians , Almains , Rutters , [ 5 ] Muffs , and Danes , That with the halberd , lance , and murdering axe , Will hazard that we might with surety hold .
[ 6 ] Though from the shortest northern parallel , Vast Grantland , compass 'd with the Frozen Sea , ( Inhabited with tall and sturdy men , Giants as big as hugy [ 7 ] Polypheme , ) Millions of soldiers cut the [ 8 ] arctic line , Bringing the strength of Europe to these arms , Our Turkey blades shall glide through all their throats , And make this champion [ 9 ] mead a bloody fen : Danubius ' stream , that runs to Trebizon , Shall carry , wrapt within his scarlet waves , As martial presents to our friends at home , The slaughter 'd bodies of these Christians : The Terrene [ 10 ] main , wherein Danubius falls , Shall by this battle be the bloody sea : The wandering sailors of proud ItalyShall meet those Christians , fleeting with the tide , Beating in heaps against their argosies , And make fair Europe , mounted on her bull , Trapp 'd with the wealth and riches of the world , Alight , and wear a woful mourning weed .
Yet , stout Orcanes , pro-rex of the world , Since Tamburlaine hath muster 'd all his men , Marching from Cairo [ 11 ] northward , with his camp , To Alexandria and the frontier towns , Meaning to make a conquest of our land , 'T is requisite to parle for a peaceWith Sigismund , the king of Hungary , And save our forces for the hot assaultsProud Tamburlaine intends Natolia .
Orcanes , ( as our legates promis 'd thee , ) We , with our peers , have cross 'd Danubius ' stream , To treat of friendly peace or deadly war.Take which thou wilt ; for , as the Romans us 'd , I here present thee with a naked sword : Wilt thou have war , then shake this blade at me ; If peace , restore it to my hands again , And I will sheathe it , to confirm the same .
Stay , Sigismund : forgett'st thou I am heThat with the cannon shook Vienna-walls , And made it dance upon the continent , As when the massy substance of the earthQuiver [ s ] about the axle-tree of heaven ? Forgett'st thou that I sent a shower of darts , Mingled with powder 'd shot and feather 'd steel , So thick upon the blink-ey 'd burghers ' heads , That thou thyself , then County Palatine , The King of Boheme , [ 18 ] and the Austric Duke , Sent heralds out , which basely on their knees , In all your names , desir 'd a truce of me ? Forgett'st thou that , to have me raise my siege , Waggons of gold were set before my tent , Stampt with the princely fowl that in her wingsCarries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove ? How canst thou think of this , and offer war ?
Vienna was besieg 'd , and I was there , Then County Palatine , but now a king , And what we did was in extremityBut now , Orcanes , view my royal host , That hides these plains , and seems as vast and wideAs doth the desert of ArabiaTo those that stand on Bagdet 's [ 19 ] lofty tower , Or as the ocean to the travellerThat rests upon the snowy Appenines ; And tell me whether I should stoop so low , Or treat of peace with the Natolian king .
Kings of Natolia and of Hungary , We came from Turkey to confirm a league , And not to dare each other to the field.A friendly parle [ 20 ] might become you both .
And we from Europe , to the same intent ; [ 21 ] Which if your general refuse or scorn , Our tents are pitch 'd , our men stand [ 22 ] in array , Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet .
So prest [ 23 ] are we : but yet , if SigismundSpeak as a friend , and stand not upon terms , Here is his sword ; let peace be ratifiedOn these conditions specified before , Drawn with advice of our ambassadors .
Then here I sheathe it , and give thee my hand , Never to draw it out , or [ 24 ] manage armsAgainst thyself or thy confederates , But , whilst I live , will be at truce with thee .
But , Sigismund , confirm it with an oath , And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ .
By Him that made the world and sav 'd my soul , The Son of God and issue of a maid , Sweet Jesus Christ , I solemnly protestAnd vow to keep this peace inviolable !
By sacred Mahomet , the friend of God , Whose holy Alcoran remains with us , Whose glorious body , when he left the world , Clos 'd in a coffin mounted up the air , And hung on stately Mecca 's temple-roof , I swear to keep this truce inviolable ! Of whose conditions [ 25 ] and our solemn oaths , Sign 'd with our hands , each shall retain a scroll , As memorable witness of our league.Now , Sigismund , if any Christian kingEncroach upon the confines of thy realm , Send word , Orcanes of NatoliaConfirm 'd [ 26 ] this league beyond Danubius ' stream , And they will , trembling , sound a quick retreat ; So am I fear 'd among all nations .
If any heathen potentate or kingInvade Natolia , Sigismund will sendA hundred thousand horse train 'd to the war , And back 'd by [ 27 ] stout lanciers of Germany , The strength and sinews of the imperial seat .
I thank thee , Sigismund ; but , when I war , All Asia Minor , Africa , and Greece , Follow my standard and my thundering drums.Come , let us go and banquet in our tents : I will despatch chief of my army henceTo fair Natolia and to Trebizon , To stay my coming 'gainst proud Tamburlaine : Friend Sigismund , and peers of Hungary , Come , banquet and carouse with us a while , And then depart we to our territories. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter CALLAPINE , and ALMEDA his keeper .
Sweet Almeda , pity the ruthful plightOf Callapine , the son of Bajazeth , Born to be monarch of the western world , Yet here detain 'd by cruel Tamburlaine .
My lord , I pity it , and with my heartWish your release ; but he whose wrath is death , My sovereign lord , renowmed [ 28 ] Tamburlaine , Forbids you further liberty than this .
Ah , were I now but half so eloquentTo paint in words what I 'll perform in deeds , I know thou wouldst depart from hence with me !
Not for all Afric : therefore move me not .
Yet hear me speak , my gentle Almeda .
No speech to that end , by your favour , sir .
By Cairo [ 29 ] runs --
No talk of running , I tell you , sir .
A little further , gentle Almeda .
Well , sir , what of this ?
How far hence lies the galley , say you ?
Sweet Almeda , scarce half a league from hence .
But need [ 35 ] we not be spied going aboard ?
Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill , And crooked bending of a craggy rock , The sails wrapt up , the mast and tacklings down , She lies so close that none can find her out .
I like that well : but , tell me , my lord , if I should let you go , would you be as good asyour word ? shall I be made a king for my labour ?
As I am Callapine the emperor , And by the hand of Mahomet I swear , Thou shalt be crown 'd a king , and be my mate !
Then here I swear , as I am Almeda , Your keeper under Tamburlaine the Great , ( For that 's the style and title I have yet , ) Although he sent a thousand armed menTo intercept this haughty enterprize , Yet would I venture to conduct your grace , And die before I brought you back again !
Thanks , gentle Almeda : then let us haste , Lest time be past , and lingering let [ 36 ] us both .
When you will , my lord : I am ready .
Even straight : -- and farewell , cursed Tamburlaine ! Now go I to revenge my father 's death. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE III.Enter TAMBURLAINE , ZENOCRATE , and their three sons , CALYPHAS , AMYRAS , and CELEBINUS , with drums and trumpets .
Now , bright Zenocrate , the world 's fair eye , Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heaven , Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air , And clothe it in a crystal livery , Now rest thee here on fair Larissa-plains , Where Egypt and the Turkish empire partBetween thy sons , that shall be emperors , And every one commander of a world .
Sweet Tamburlaine , when wilt thou leave these arms , And save thy sacred person free from scathe , And dangerous chances of the wrathful war ?
When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles , And when the ground , whereon my soldiers march , Shall rise aloft and touch the horned moon ; And not before , my sweet Zenocrate.Sit up , and rest thee like a lovely queen.So ; now she sits in pomp and majesty , When these , my sons , more precious in mine eyesThan all the wealthy kingdoms I subdu 'd , Plac 'd by her side , look on their mother 's face.But yet methinks their looks are amorous , Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine : Water and air , being symboliz 'd in one , Argue their want of courage and of wit ; Their hair as white as milk , and soft as down , ( Which should be like the quills of porcupines , As black as jet , and hard as iron or steel , ) Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars ; Their fingers made to quaver on a lute , Their arms to hang about a lady 's neck , Their legs to dance and caper in the air , Would make me think them bastards , not my sons , But that I know they issu 'd from thy womb , That never look 'd on man but Tamburlaine .
My gracious lord , they have their mother 's looks , But , when they list , their conquering father 's heart.This lovely boy , the youngest of the three , Not long ago bestrid a Scythian steed , Trotting the ring , and tilting at a glove , Which when he tainted [ 37 ] with his slender rod , He rein 'd him straight , and made him so curvetAs I cried out for fear he should have faln .
Well done , my boy ! thou shalt have shield and lance , Armour of proof , horse , helm , and curtle-axe , And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe , And harmless run among the deadly pikes.If thou wilt love the wars and follow me , Thou shalt be made a king and reign with me , Keeping in iron cages emperors.If thou exceed thy elder brothers ' worth , And shine in complete virtue more than they , Thou shalt be king before them , and thy seedShall issue crowned from their mother 's womb .
Yes , father ; you shall see me , if I live , Have under me as many kings as you , And march with such a multitude of menAs all the world shall [ 38 ] tremble at their view .
These words assure me , boy , thou art my son.When I am old and can not manage arms , Be thou the scourge and terror of the world .
Why may not I , my lord , as well as he , Be term 'd the scourge and terror of [ 39 ] the world ?
Be all a scourge and terror to [ 40 ] the world , Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine .
But , while my brothers follow arms , my lord , Let me accompany my gracious mother : They are enough to conquer all the world , And you have won enough for me to keep .
Bastardly boy , sprung [ 41 ] from some coward 's loins , And not the issue of great Tamburlaine ! Of all the provinces I have subdu'dThou shalt not have a foot , unless thou bearA mind courageous and invincible ; For he shall wear the crown of PersiaWhose head hath deepest scars , whose breast most wounds , Which , being wroth , sends lightning from his eyes , And in the furrows of his frowning browsHarbours revenge , war , death , and cruelty ; For in a field , whose superficies [ 42 ] Is cover 'd with a liquid purple veil , And sprinkled with the brains of slaughter 'd men , My royal chair of state shall be advanc 'd ; And he that means to place himself therein , Must armed wade up to the chin in blood .
My lord , such speeches to our princely sonsDismay their minds before they come to proveThe wounding troubles angry war affords .
No , madam , these are speeches fit for us ; For , if his chair were in a sea of blood , I would prepare a ship and sail to it , Ere I would lose the title of a king .
And I would strive to swim through [ 43 ] pools of blood , Or make a bridge of murder 'd carcasses , [ 44 ] Whose arches should be fram 'd with bones of Turks , Ere I would lose the title of a king .
Well , lovely boys , ye shall be emperors both , Stretching your conquering arms from east to west : -- And , sirrah , if you mean to wear a crown , When we [ 45 ] shall meet the Turkish deputyAnd all his viceroys , snatch it from his head , And cleave his pericranion with thy sword .
If any man will hold him , I will strike , And cleave him to the channel [ 46 ] with my sword .
Hold him , and cleave him too , or I 'll cleave thee ; For we will march against them presently.Theridamas , Techelles , and CasanePromis 'd to meet me on Larissa-plains , With hosts a-piece against this Turkish crew ; For I have sworn by sacred MahometTo make it parcel of my empery.The trumpets sound ; Zenocrate , they come.Enter THERIDAMAS , and his train , with drums and trumpets.Welcome , Theridamas , king of Argier .
My lord , the great and mighty Tamburlaine , Arch-monarch of the world , I offer hereMy crown , myself , and all the power I have , In all affection at thy kingly feet .
Thanks , good Theridamas .
Under my colours march ten thousand Greeks , And of Argier and Afric 's frontier townsTwice twenty thousand valiant men-at-arms ; All which have sworn to sack Natolia.Five hundred brigandines are under sail , Meet for your service on the sea , my lord , That , launching from Argier to Tripoly , Will quickly ride before Natolia , And batter down the castles on the shore .
Well said , Argier ! receive thy crown again.Enter USUMCASANE and TECHELLES.Kings of Morocco [ 47 ] and of Fez , welcome .
Magnificent and peerless Tamburlaine , I and my neighbour king of Fez have brought , To aid thee in this Turkish expedition , A hundred thousand expert soldiers ; ] From Azamor to Tunis near the seaIs Barbary unpeopled for thy sake , And all the men in armour under me , Which with my crown I gladly offer thee .
Thanks , king of Morocco : take your crown again .
And , mighty Tamburlaine , our earthly god , Whose looks make this inferior world to quake , I here present thee with the crown of Fez , And with an host of Moors train 'd to the war , [ 48 ] Whose coal-black faces make their foes retire , And quake for fear , as if infernal [ 49 ] Jove , Meaning to aid thee [ 50 ] in these [ 51 ] Turkish arms , Should pierce the black circumference of hell , With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags , And millions of his strong [ 52 ] tormenting spirits : ] From strong Tesella unto BiledullAll Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake .
My lord , our men of Barbary have march'dFour hundred miles with armour on their backs , And lain in leaguer [ 54 ] fifteen months and more ; For , since we left you at the Soldan 's court , We have subdu 'd the southern Guallatia , And all the land unto the coast of Spain ; We kept the narrow Strait of Jubalter , [ 55 ] And made Canaria call us kings and lords : Yet never did they recreate themselves , Or cease one day from war and hot alarms ; And therefore let them rest a while , my lord .
They shall , Casane , and 't is time , i'faith .
And I have march 'd along the river NileTo Machda , where the mighty Christian priest , Call 'd John the Great , [ 56 ] sits in a milk-white robe , Whose triple mitre I did take by force , And made him swear obedience to my crown. ] From thence unto Cazates did I march , Where Amazonians met me in the field , With whom , being women , I vouchsaf 'd a league , And with my power did march to Zanzibar , The western part of Afric , where I view'dThe Ethiopian sea , rivers and lakes , But neither man nor child in all the land : Therefore I took my course to Manico , Where , [ 57 ] unresisted , I remov 'd my camp ; And , by the coast of Byather , [ 58 ] at lastI came to Cubar , where the negroes dwell , And , conquering that , made haste to Nubia.There , having sack 'd Borno , the kingly seat , I took the king and led him bound in chainsUnto Damascus , [ 59 ] where I stay 'd before .
Well done , Techelles ! -- What saith Theridamas ?
I left the confines and the bounds of Afric , And made [ 60 ] a voyage into Europe , Where , by the river Tyras , I subdu'dStoka , Podolia , and Codemia ; Then cross 'd the sea and came to Oblia , And Nigra Silva , where the devils dance , Which , in despite of them , I set on fire. ] From thence I cross 'd the gulf call 'd by the nameMare Majore of the inhabitants.Yet shall my soldiers make no periodUntil Natolia kneel before your feet .
Then will we triumph , banquet and carouse ; Cooks shall have pensions to provide us cates , And glut us with the dainties of the world ; Lachryma Christi and Calabrian winesShall common soldiers drink in quaffing bowls , Ay , liquid gold , when we have conquer 'd him , [ 61 ] Mingled with coral and with orient [ 62 ] pearl.Come , let us banquet and carouse the whiles. [ Exeunt. ] ACT II.SCENE I.Enter SIGISMUND , FREDERICK , and BALDWIN , with their train .
Now say , my lords of Buda and Bohemia , What motion is it that inflames your thoughts , And stirs your valours to such sudden arms ?
Your majesty remembers , I am sure , What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloodsThese heathenish Turks and pagans lately madeBetwixt the city Zula and Danubius ; How through the midst of Varna and Bulgaria , And almost to the very walls of Rome , They have , not long since , massacred our camp.It resteth now , then , that your majestyTake all advantages of time and power , And work revenge upon these infidels.Your highness knows , for Tamburlaine 's repair , That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts , Natolia hath dismiss 'd the greatest partOf all his army , pitch 'd against our powerBetwixt Cutheia and Orminius ' mount , And sent them marching up to Belgasar , Acantha , Antioch , and Caesarea , To aid the kings of Soria [ 63 ] and Jerusalem.Now , then , my lord , advantage take thereof , [ 64 ] And issue suddenly upon the rest ; That , in the fortune of their overthrow , We may discourage all the pagan troopThat dare attempt to war with Christians .
But calls not , then , your grace to memoryThe league we lately made with King Orcanes , Confirm 'd by oath and articles of peace , And calling Christ for record of our truths ? This should be treachery and violenceAgainst the grace of our profession .
No whit , my lord ; for with such infidels , In whom no faith nor true religion rests , We are not bound to those accomplishmentsThe holy laws of Christendom enjoin ; But , as the faith which they profanely plightIs not by necessary policyTo be esteem 'd assurance for ourselves , So that we vow [ 65 ] to them should not infringeOur liberty of arms and victory .
Though I confess the oaths they undertakeBreed little strength to our security , Yet those infirmities that thus defameTheir faiths , [ 66 ] their honours , and religion , [ 67 ] Should not give us presumption to the like.Our faiths are sound , and must be consummate , [ 68 ] Religious , righteous , and inviolate .
Assure your grace , 't is superstitionTo stand so strictly on dispensive faith ; And , should we lose the opportunityThat God hath given to venge our Christians ' death , And scourge their foul blasphemous paganism , As fell to Saul , to Balaam , and the rest , That would not kill and curse at God 's command , So surely will the vengeance of the Highest , And jealous anger of his fearful arm , Be pour 'd with rigour on our sinful heads , If we neglect this [ 69 ] offer 'd victory .
Then arm , my lords , and issue suddenly , Giving commandment to our general host , With expedition to assail the pagan , And take the victory our God hath given. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter ORCANES , GAZELLUS , and URIBASSA , with their train .
Gazellus , Uribassa , and the rest , Now will we march from proud Orminius ' mountTo fair Natolia , where our neighbour kingsExpect our power and our royal presence , T ' encounter with the cruel Tamburlaine , That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host , And with the thunder of his martial [ 70 ] toolsMakes earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven .
And now come we to make his sinews shakeWith greater power than erst his pride hath felt.An hundred kings , by scores , will bid him arms , And hundred thousands subjects to each score : Which , if a shower of wounding thunderboltsShould break out of the bowels of the clouds , And fall as thick as hail upon our heads , In partial aid of that proud Scythian , Yet should our courages and steeled crests , And numbers , more than infinite , of men , Be able to withstand and conquer him .
Methinks I see how glad the Christian kingIs made for joy of our [ 71 ] admitted truce , That could not but before be terrifiedWith [ 72 ] unacquainted power of our host.Enter a Messenger .
Arm , dread sovereign , and my noble lords ! The treacherous army of the Christians , Taking advantage of your slender power , Comes marching on us , and determines straightTo bid us battle for our dearest lives .
Traitors , villains , damned Christians ! Have I not here the articles of peaceAnd solemn covenants we have both confirm 'd , He by his Christ , and I by Mahomet ?
Hell and confusion light upon their heads , That with such treason seek our overthrow , And care so little for their prophet Christ !
Discomfited is all the Christian [ 76 ] host , And God hath thunder 'd vengeance from on high , For my accurs 'd and hateful perjury.O just and dreadful punisher of sin , Let the dishonour of the pains I feelIn this my mortal well-deserved woundEnd all my penance in my sudden death ! And let this death , wherein to sin I die , Conceive a second life in endless mercy ! [ Dies. ] Enter ORCANES , GAZELLUS , URIBASSA , with others .
Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods , And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend .
See , here the perjur 'd traitor Hungary , Bloody and breathless for his villany !
Now shall his barbarous body be a preyTo beasts and fowls , and all the winds shall breathe , Through shady leaves of every senseless tree , Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.Now scalds his soul in the Tartarian streams , And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell , That Zoacum , [ 77 ] that fruit of bitterness , That in the midst of fire is ingraff 'd , Yet flourisheth , as Flora in her pride , With apples like the heads of damned fiends.The devils there , in chains of quenchless flame , Shall lead his soul , through Orcus ' burning gulf , ] From pain to pain , whose change shall never end.What say'st thou yet , Gazellus , to his foil , Which we referr 'd to justice of his ChristAnd to his power , which here appears as fullAs rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight ?
'T is but the fortune of the wars , my lord , Whose power is often prov 'd a miracle .
Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honoured , Not doing Mahomet an [ 78 ] injury , Whose power had share in this our victory ; And , since this miscreant hath disgrac 'd his faith , And died a traitor both to heaven and earth , We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk [ 79 ] Amidst these plains for fowls to prey upon.Go , Uribassa , give [ 80 ] it straight in charge .
I will , my lord. [ Exit . ]
And now , Gazellus , let us haste and meetOur army , and our brother [ s ] of Jerusalem , Of Soria , [ 81 ] Trebizon , and Amasia , And happily , with full Natolian bowlsOf Greekish wine , now let us celebrateOur happy conquest and his angry fate. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE IV.The arras is drawn , and ZENOCRATE is discovered lyingin her bed of state ; TAMBURLAINE sitting by her ; threePHYSICIANS about her bed , tempering potions ; her threesons , CALYPHAS , AMYRAS , and CELEBINUS ; THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , and USUMCASANE .
Tell me , how fares my fair Zenocrate ?
I fare , my lord , as other empresses , That , when this frail and [ 86 ] transitory fleshHath suck 'd the measure of that vital airThat feeds the body with his dated health , Wane with enforc 'd and necessary change .
May never such a change transform my love , In whose sweet being I repose my life ! Whose heavenly presence , beautified with health , Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars ; Whose absence makes [ 87 ] the sun and moon as darkAs when , oppos 'd in one diameter , Their spheres are mounted on the serpent 's head , Or else descended to his winding train.Live still , my love , and so conserve my life , Or , dying , be the author [ 88 ] of my death .
Live still , my lord ; O , let my sovereign live ! And sooner let the fiery elementDissolve , and make your kingdom in the sky , Than this base earth should shroud your majesty ; For , should I but suspect your death by mine , The comfort of my future happiness , And hope to meet your highness in the heavens , Turn 'd to despair , would break my wretched breast , And fury would confound my present rest.But let me die , my love ; yes , [ 89 ] let me die ; With love and patience let your true love die : Your grief and fury hurts my second life.Yet let me kiss my lord before I die , And let me die with kissing of my lord.But , since my life is lengthen 'd yet a while , Let me take leave of these my loving sons , And of my lords , whose true nobilityHave merited my latest memory.Sweet sons , farewell ! in death resemble me , And in your lives your father 's excellence. [ 90 ] Some music , and my fit will cease , my lord. [ They call for music . ]
Ah , good my lord , be patient ! she is dead , And all this raging can not make her live.If words might serve , our voice hath rent the air ; If tears , our eyes have water 'd all the earth ; If grief , our murder 'd hearts have strain 'd forth blood : Nothing prevails , [ 92 ] for she is dead , my lord .
Callapinus Cyricelibes , otherwise Cybelius , son andsuccessive heir to the late mighty emperor Bajazeth , by the aidof God and his friend Mahomet , Emperor of Natolia , Jerusalem , Trebizon , Soria , Amasia , Thracia , Ilyria , Carmania , and all thehundred and thirty kingdoms late contributory to his mightyfather , -- long live Callapinus , Emperor of Turkey !
Our battle , then , in martial manner pitch 'd , According to our ancient use , shall bearThe figure of the semicircled moon , Whose horns shell sprinkle through the tainted airThe poison 'd brains of this proud Scythian .
Well , then , my noble lords , for this my friendThat freed me from the bondage of my foe , I think it requisite and honourableTo keep my promise and to make him king , That is a gentleman , I know , at least .
That 's no matter , [ 106 ] sir , for being a king ; or Tamburlaine came up of nothing.KING OF JERUSALEM. Your majesty may choose some 'pointed time , Performing all your promise to the full ; 'T is naught for your majesty to give a kingdom .
Then will I shortly keep my promise , Almeda .
Why , I thank your majesty. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter TAMBURLAINE and his three sons , CALYPHAS , AMYRAS , andCELEBINUS ; USUMCASANE ; four ATTENDANTS bearing the hearse ofZENOCRATE , and the drums sounding a doleful march ; the townburning .
So burn the turrets of this cursed town , Flame to the highest region of the air , And kindle heaps of exhalations , That , being fiery meteors , may presageDeath and destruction to the inhabitants ! Over my zenith hang a blazing star , That may endure till heaven be dissolv 'd , Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs , Threatening a dearth [ 107 ] and famine to this land ! Flying dragons , lightning , fearful thunder-claps , Singe these fair plains , and make them seem as blackAs is the island where the Furies mask , Compass 'd with Lethe , Styx , and Phlegethon , Because my dear Zenocrate is dead !
This pillar , plac 'd in memory of her , Where in Arabian , Hebrew , Greek , is writ , THIS TOWN , BEING BURNT BY TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT , FORBIDS THE WORLD TO BUILD IT UP AGAIN .
And here this mournful streamer shall be plac 'd , Wrought with the Persian and th ' [ 108 ] Egyptian arms , To signify she was a princess born , And wife unto the monarch of the East .
And here this table as a registerOf all her virtues and perfections .
And here the picture of Zenocrate , To shew her beauty which the world admir 'd ; Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate , That , hanging here , will draw the gods from heaven , And cause the stars fix 'd in the southern arc , ( Whose lovely faces never any view'dThat have not pass 'd the centre 's latitude , ) As pilgrims travel to our hemisphere , Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.Thou shalt not beautify Larissa-plains , But keep within the circle of mine arms : At every town and castle I besiege , Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent ; And , when I meet an army in the field , Those [ 109 ] looks will shed such influence in my camp , As if Bellona , goddess of the war , Threw naked swords and sulphur-balls of fireUpon the heads of all our enemies. -- And now , my lords , advance your spears again ; Sorrow no more , my sweet Casane , now : Boys , leave to mourn ; this town shall ever mourn , Being burnt to cinders for your mother 's death .
If I had wept a sea of tears for her , would not ease the sorrows [ 110 ] I sustain .
As is that town , so is my heart consum'dWith grief and sorrow for my mother 's death .
My mother 's death hath mortified my mind , And sorrow stops the passage of my speech .
My lord , but this is dangerous to be done ; We may be slain or wounded ere we learn .
I know not [ 127 ] what I should think of it ; methinks 't is a pitiful sight .
'T is [ 128 ] nothing. -- Give me a wound , father .
And me another , my lord .
Come , sirrah , give me your arm .
Here , father , cut it bravely , as you did your own .
It shall suffice thou dar'st abide a wound ; My boy , thou shalt not lose a drop of bloodBefore we meet the army of the Turk ; But then run desperate through the thickest throngs , Dreadless of blows , of bloody wounds , and death ; And let the burning of Larissa-walls , My speech of war , and this my wound you see , Teach you , my boys , to bear courageous minds , Fit for the followers of great Tamburlaine. -- Usumcasane , now come , let us marchTowards Techelles and Theridamas , That we have sent before to fire the towns , The towers and cities of these hateful Turks , And hunt that coward faint-heart runaway , With that accursed [ 129 ] traitor Almeda , Till fire and sword have found them at a bay .
I long to pierce his [ 130 ] bowels with my sword , That hath betray 'd my gracious sovereign , -- That curs 'd and damned traitor Almeda .
Then let us see if coward CallapineDare levy arms against our puissance , That we may tread upon his captive neck , And treble all his father 's slaveries. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE III.Enter TECHELLES , THERIDAMAS , and their train .
Thus have we march 'd northward from Tamburlaine , Unto the frontier point [ 131 ] of Soria ; [ 132 ] And this is Balsera , their chiefest hold , Wherein is all the treasure of the land .
Then let us bring our light artillery , Minions , falc'nets , and sakers , [ 133 ] to the trench , Filling the ditches with the walls ' wide breach , And enter in to seize upon the hold. -- [ 134 ] How say you , soldiers , shall we not ?
Yes , my lord , yes ; come , let 's about it .
But stay a while ; summon a parle , drum.It may be they will yield it quietly , [ 135 ] Knowing two kings , the friends [ 136 ] to Tamburlaine , Stand at the walls with such a mighty power. [ A parley sounded. -- CAPTAIN appears on the walls , with OLYMPIA his wife , and his SON . ]
What require you , my masters ?
Captain , that thou yield up thy hold to us .
To you ! why , do you [ 137 ] think me weary of it ?
Nay , captain , thou art weary of thy life , If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlaine .
These pioners [ 138 ] of Argier in Africa , Even in [ 139 ] the cannon 's face , shall raise a hillOf earth and faggots higher than thy fort , And , over thy argins [ 140 ] and cover 'd ways , Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy holdVolleys of ordnance , till the breach be madeThat with his ruin fills up all the trench ; And , when we enter in , not heaven itselfShall ransom thee , thy wife , and family .
Captain , these Moors shall cut the leaden pipesThat bring fresh water to thy men and thee , And lie in trench before thy castle-walls , That no supply of victual shall come in , Nor [ any ] issue forth but they shall die ; And , therefore , captain , yield it quietly. [ 141 ]
Were you , that are the friends of Tamburlaine , [ 142 ] Brothers of [ 143 ] holy Mahomet himself , I would not yield it ; therefore do your worst : Raise mounts , batter , intrench , and undermine , Cut off the water , all convoys that can , [ 144 ] Yet I am [ 145 ] resolute : and so , farewell. [ CAPTAIN , OLYMPIA , and SON , retire from the walls . ]
Pioners , away ! and where I stuck the stake , Intrench with those dimensions I prescrib 'd ; Cast up the earth towards the castle-wall , Which , till it may defend you , labour low , And few or none shall perish by their shot .
We will , my lord. [ Exeunt PIONERS . ]
A hundred horse shall scout about the plains , To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.Both we , Theridamas , will intrench our men , And with the Jacob 's staff measure the heightAnd distance of the castle from the trench , That we may know if our artilleryWill carry full point-blank unto their walls .
Then see the bringing of our ordnanceAlong the trench into [ 146 ] the battery , Where we will have gallions of six foot broad , To save our cannoneers from musket-shot ; Betwixt which shall our ordnance thunder forth , And with the breach 's fall , smoke , fire , and dust , The crack , the echo , and the soldiers ' cry , Make deaf the air and dim the crystal sky .
Trumpets and drums , alarum presently ! And , soldiers , play the men ; the hold [ 147 ] is yours ! [ Exeunt. ] SCENE IV.Alarms within. Enter the CAPTAIN , with OLYMPIA , and his
Come , good my lord , and let us haste from hence , Along the cave that leads beyond the foe : No hope is left to save this conquer 'd hold .
A deadly bullet , gliding through my side , Lies heavy on my heart ; I can not live : I feel my liver pierc 'd , and all my veins , That there begin and nourish every part , Mangled and torn , and all my entrails bath'dIn blood that straineth [ 148 ] from their orifex.Farewell , sweet wife ! sweet son , farewell ! I die. [ Dies . ]
Death , whither art thou gone , that both we live ? Come back again , sweet Death , and strike us both ! One minute and our days , and one sepulchreContain our bodies ! Death , why com'st thou notWell , this must be the messenger for thee : [ Drawing a dagger. ] Now , ugly Death , stretch out thy sable wings , And carry both our souls where his remains. -- Tell me , sweet boy , art thou content to die ? These barbarous Scythians , full of cruelty , And Moors , in whom was never pity found , Will hew us piecemeal , put us to the wheel , Or else invent some torture worse than that ; Therefore die by thy loving mother 's hand , Who gently now will lance thy ivory throat , And quickly rid thee both of pain and life .
Mother , despatch me , or I 'll kill myself ; For think you I can live and see him dead ? Give me your knife , good mother , or strike home : [ 149 ] The Scythians shall not tyrannize on me : Sweet mother , strike , that I may meet my father. [ She stabs him , and he dies . ]
Ah , sacred Mahomet , if this be sin , Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven , And purge my soul before it come to thee ! [ She burns the bodies of her HUSBAND and SON , and then attempts to kill herself. ] Enter THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , and all their train .
How now , madam ! what are you doing ?
Killing myself , as I have done my son , Whose body , with his father 's , I have burnt , Lest cruel Scythians should dismember him .
'T was bravely done , and like a soldier 's wife.Thou shalt with us to Tamburlaine the Great , Who , when he hears how resolute thou wert , [ 150 ] Will match thee with a viceroy or a king .
My lord deceas 'd was dearer unto meThan any viceroy , king , or emperor ; And for his sake here will I end my days .
But , lady , go with us to Tamburlaine , And thou shalt see a man greater than Mahomet , In whose high looks is much more majesty , Than from the concave superficiesOf Jove 's vast palace , the empyreal orb , Unto the shining bower where Cynthia sits , Like lovely Thetis , in a crystal robe ; That treadeth Fortune underneath his feet , And makes the mighty god of arms his slave ; On whom Death and the Fatal Sisters waitWith naked swords and scarlet liveries ; Before whom , mounted on a lion 's back , Rhamnusia bears a helmet full of blood , And strows the way with brains of slaughter 'd men ; By whose proud side the ugly Furies run , Hearkening when he shall bid them plague the world ; Over whose zenith , cloth 'd in windy air , And eagle 's wings join 'd [ 151 ] to her feather 'd breast , Fame hovereth , sounding of [ 152 ] her golden trump , That to the adverse poles of that straight lineWhich measureth the glorious frame of heavenThe name of mighty Tamburlaine is spread ; And him , fair lady , shall thy eyes behold.Come .
Take pity of a lady 's ruthful tears , That humbly craves upon her knees to stay , And cast her body in the burning flameThat feeds upon her son 's and husband 's flesh .
Madam , sooner shall fire consume us bothThan scorch a face so beautiful as this , In frame of which Nature hath shew 'd more skillThan when she gave eternal chaos form , Drawing from it the shining lamps of heaven .
Madam , I am so far in love with you , That you must go with us : no remedy .
Then carry me , I care not , where you will , And let the end of this my fatal journeyBe likewise end to my accursed life .
No , madam , but the [ 153 ] beginning of your joy : Come willingly therefore .
Soldiers , now let us meet the general , Who by this time is at Natolia , Ready to charge the army of the Turk.The gold and [ 154 ] silver , and the pearl , ye got , Rifling this fort , divide in equal shares : This lady shall have twice so much againOut of the coffers of our treasury. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE V.Enter CALLAPINE , ORCANES , the KINGS OF JERUSALEM , TREBIZON , and SORIA , with their train , ALMEDA , and a MESSENGER .
Renowmed [ 155 ] emperor , mighty [ 156 ] Callapine , God 's great lieutenant over all the world , Here at Aleppo , with an host of men , Lies Tamburlaine , this king of Persia , ( In number more than are the [ 157 ] quivering leavesOf Ida 's forest , where your highness ' houndsWith open cry pursue the wounded stag , ) Who means to girt Natolia 's walls with siege , Fire the town , and over-run the land .
My royal army is as great as his , That , from the bounds of Phrygia to the seaWhich washeth Cyprus with his brinish waves , Covers the hills , the valleys , and the plains.Viceroys and peers of Turkey , play the men ; Whet all your [ 158 ] swords to mangle Tamburlaine , His sons , his captains , and his followers : By Mahomet , not one of them shall live ! The field wherein this battle shall be foughtFor ever term 'd [ 159 ] the Persians ' sepulchre , In memory of this our victory .
Now he that calls himself the [ 160 ] scourge of Jove , The emperor of the world , and earthly god , Shall end the warlike progress he intends , And travel headlong to the lake of hell , Where legions of devils ( knowing he must dieHere in Natolia by your [ 161 ] highness ' hands ) , All brandishing their [ 162 ] brands of quenchless fire , Stretching their monstrous paws , grin with [ 163 ] their teeth , And guard the gates to entertain his soul .
Tell me , viceroys , the number of your men , And what our army royal is esteem'd.KING OF JERUSALEM. From Palestina and Jerusalem , Of Hebrews three score thousand fighting menAre come , since last we shew 'd your [ 164 ] majesty .
So from Arabia Desert , and the boundsOf that sweet land whose brave metropolisRe-edified the fair Semiramis , Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse , Since last we number 'd to your majesty.KING OF TREBIZON. From Trebizon in Asia the Less , Naturaliz 'd Turks and stout BithyniansCame to my bands , full fifty thousand more , ( That , fighting , know not what retreat doth mean , Nor e'er return but with the victory , ) Since last we number 'd to your majesty.KING OF SORIA. Of Sorians [ 165 ] from Halla is repair 'd , [ 166 ] And neighbour cities of your highness ' land , [ 167 ] Ten thousand horse , and thirty thousand foot , Since last we number 'd to your majesty ; So that the army royal is esteem'dSix hundred thousand valiant fighting men .
Then welcome , Tamburlaine , unto thy death ! -- Come , puissant viceroys , let us to the field ( The Persians ' sepulchre ) , and sacrificeMountains of breathless men to Mahomet , Who now , with Jove , opens the firmamentTo see the slaughter of our enemies.Enter TAMBURLAINE with his three SONS , CALYPHAS , AMYRAS , and CELEBINUS ; USUMCASANE , and others .
How now , Casane ! see , a knot of kings , Sitting as if they were a-telling riddles !
My lord , your presence makes them pale and wan : Poor souls , they look as if their deaths were near .
Why , so he [ 168 ] is , Casane ; I am here : But yet I 'll save their lives , and make them slaves. -- Ye petty kings of Turkey , I am come , As Hector did into the Grecian camp , To overdare the pride of Graecia , And set his warlike person to the viewOf fierce Achilles , rival of his fame : I do you honour in the simile ; For , if I should , as Hector did Achilles , ( The worthiest knight that ever brandish 'd sword , ) Challenge in combat any of you all , I see how fearfully ye would refuse , And fly my glove as from a scorpion .
Now , thou art fearful of thy army 's strength , Thou wouldst with overmatch of person fight : But , shepherd 's issue , base-born Tamburlaine , Think of thy end ; this sword shall lance thy throat .
Villain , the shepherd 's issue ( at whose birthHeaven did afford a gracious aspect , And join 'd those stars that shall be oppositeEven till the dissolution of the world , And never meant to make a conquerorSo famous as is [ 169 ] mighty Tamburlaine ) Shall so torment thee , and that Callapine , That , like a roguish runaway , suborn'dThat villain there , that slave , that Turkish dog , To false his service to his sovereign , As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine .
Rail not , proud Scythian : I shall now revengeMy father 's vile abuses and mine own.KING OF JERUSALEM. By Mahomet , he shall be tied in chains , Rowing with Christians in a brigandineAbout the Grecian isles to rob and spoil , And turn him to his ancient trade again : Methinks the slave should make a lusty thief .
Nay , when the battle ends , all we will meet , And sit in council to invent some painThat most may vex his body and his soul .
Sirrah Callapine , I 'll hang a clog aboutyour neck for running away again : you shall nottrouble me thus to come and fetch you. -- But as for you , viceroy [ s ] , you shall have bits , And , harness 'd [ 170 ] like my horses , draw my coach ; And , when ye stay , be lash 'd with whips of wire : I 'll have you learn to feed on [ 171 ] provender , And in a stable lie upon the planks .
But , Tamburlaine , first thou shalt [ 172 ] kneel to us , And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.KING OF TREBIZON. The common soldiers of our mighty hostShall bring thee bound unto the [ 173 ] general 's tent [ . ] KING OF SORIA. And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death , Or bind thee in eternal torments ' wrath .
Well , sirs , diet yourselves ; you know Ishall have occasion shortly to journey you .
See , father , how Almeda the jailor looks upon us !
Villain , traitor , damned fugitive , I 'll make thee wish the earth had swallow 'd thee ! See'st thou not death within my wrathful looks ? Go , villain , cast thee headlong from a rock , Or rip thy bowels , and rent [ 174 ] out thy heart , T ' appease my wrath ; or else I 'll torture thee , Searing thy hateful flesh with burning ironsAnd drops of scalding lead , while all thy jointsBe rack 'd and beat asunder with the wheel ; For , if thou liv'st , not any elementShall shroud thee from the wrath of Tamburlaine .
Well , in despite of thee , he shall be king. -- Come , Almeda ; receive this crown of me : I here invest thee king of Ariadan , Bordering on Mare Roso , near to Mecca .
What ! take it , man .
[ to Tamb. ] Good my lord , let me take it .
Dost thou ask him leave ? here ; take it .
Go to , sirrah ! [ 175 ] take your crown , and make upthe half dozen. So , sirrah , now you are a king , you must givearms. [ 176 ]
So he shall , and wear thy head in his scutcheon .
No ; [ 177 ] let him hang a bunch of keys on hisstandard , to put him in remembrance he was a jailor , that , when I take him , I may knock out his brains with them , and lock you in the stable , when you shall come sweatingfrom my chariot.KING OF TREBIZON. Away ! let us to the field , that the villainmay be slain .
Sirrah , prepare whips , and bring my chariotto my tent ; for , as soon as the battle is done , I 'll ridein triumph through the camp.Enter THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , and their train.How now , ye petty kings ? lo , here are bugs [ 178 ] Will make the hair stand upright on your heads , And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet ! -- Welcome , Theridamas and Techelles , both : See ye this rout , [ 179 ] and know ye this same king ?
Ay , my lord ; he was Callapine 's keeper .
Well , now ye see he is a king. Look to him , Theridamas , when we are fighting , lest he hide his crownas the foolish king of Persia did. [ 180 ] KING OF SORIA. No , Tamburlaine ; he shall not be putto that exigent , I warrant thee .
You know not , sir. -- But now , my followers and my loving friends , Fight as you ever did , like conquerors , The glory of this happy day is yours.My stern aspect [ 181 ] shall make fair Victory , Hovering betwixt our armies , light on me , Loaden with laurel-wreaths to crown us all .
I smile to think how , when this field is foughtAnd rich Natolia ours , our men shall sweatWith carrying pearl and treasure on their backs .
You shall be princes all , immediately. -- Come , fight , ye Turks , or yield us victory .
No ; we will meet thee , slavish Tamburlaine. [ Exeunt severally. ] ACT IV.SCENE I.Alarms within. AMYRAS and CELEBINUS issue from the tentwhere CALYPHAS sits asleep. [ 182 ]
Now in their glories shine the golden crownsOf these proud Turks , much like so many sunsThat half dismay the majesty of heaven.Now , brother , follow we our father 's sword , That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts , And cuts down armies with his conquering wings .
Call forth our lazy brother from the tent , For , if my father miss him in the field , Wrath , kindled in the furnace of his breast , Will send a deadly lightning to his heart .
Brother , ho ! what , given so much to sleep , You can not [ 183 ] leave it , when our enemies ' drumsAnd rattling cannons thunder in our earsOur proper ruin and our father 's foil ?
Away , ye fools ! my father needs not me , Nor you , in faith , but that you will be thoughtMore childish-valourous than manly-wise.If half our camp should sit and sleep with me , My father were enough to scare [ 184 ] the foe : You do dishonour to his majesty , To think our helps will do him any good .
What , dar'st thou , then , be absent from the fight , Knowing my father hates thy cowardice , And oft hath warn 'd thee to be still in field , When he himself amidst the thickest troopsBeats down our foes , to flesh our taintless swords ?
I know , sir , what it is to kill a man ; It works remorse of conscience in me.I take no pleasure to be murderous , Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst .
O cowardly boy ! fie , for shame , come forth ! Thou dost dishonour manhood and thy house .
Go , go , tall [ 185 ] stripling , fight you for us both , And take my other toward brother here , For person like to prove a second Mars.'Twill please my mind as well to hear , both you [ 186 ] Have won a heap of honour in the field , And left your slender carcasses behind , As if I lay with you for company .
You will not go , then ?
You say true .
Were all the lofty mounts of Zona MundiThat fill the midst of farthest TartaryTurn 'd into pearl and proffer 'd for my stay , I would not bide the fury of my father , When , made a victor in these haughty arms , He comes and finds his sons have had no sharesIn all the honours he propos 'd for us .
Take you the honour , I will take my ease ; My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice : I go into the field before I need ! [ Alarms within. AMYRAS and CELEBINUS run out. ] The bullets fly at random where they list ; And , should I [ 187 ] go , and kill a thousand men , I were as soon rewarded with a shot , And sooner far than he that never fights ; And , should I go , and do no harm nor good , I might have harm , which all the good I have , Join 'd with my father 's crown , would never cure.I 'll to cards. -- Perdicas ! Enter PERDICAS .
Here , my lord .
Come , thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time .
Content , my lord : but what shall we play for ?
Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks ' concubinesfirst , when my father hath conquered them .
Agreed , i'faith. [ They play . ]
They say I am a coward , Perdicas , and I fearas little their taratantaras , their swords , or their cannonsas I do a naked lady in a net of gold , and , for fear I should beafraid , would put it off and come to bed with me .
Such a fear , my lord , would never make ye retire .
I would my father would let me be put in the frontof such a battle once , to try my valour ! [ Alarms within. ] What a coil they keep ! I believe there will be some hurt doneanon amongst them.Enter TAMBURLAINE , THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , USUMCASANE ; AMYRAS and CELEBINUS leading in ORCANES , and the KINGSOF JERUSALEM , TREBIZON , and SORIA ; and SOLDIERS .
See now , ye [ 188 ] slaves , my children stoop your pride , [ 189 ] And lead your bodies [ 190 ] sheep-like to the sword ! -- Bring them , my boys , and tell me if the warsBe not a life that may illustrate gods , And tickle not your spirits with desireStill to be train 'd in arms and chivalry ?
Shall we let go these kings again , my lord , To gather greater numbers 'gainst our power , That they may say , it is not chance doth this , But matchless strength and magnanimity ?
No , no , Amyras ; tempt not Fortune so : Cherish thy valour still with fresh supplies , And glut it not with stale and daunted foes.But where 's this coward villain , not my son , But traitor to my name and majesty ? [ He goes in and brings CALYPHAS out. ] Image of sloth , and picture of a slave , The obloquy and scorn of my renown ! How may my heart , thus fired with mine [ 191 ] eyes , Wounded with shame and kill 'd with discontent , Shroud any thought may [ 192 ] hold my striving hands ] From martial justice on thy wretched soul ?
Yet pardon him , I pray your majesty.TECHELLES and USUMCASANE.Let all of us entreat your highness ' pardon .
Stand up , [ 193 ] ye base , unworthy soldiers ! Know ye not yet the argument of arms ?
Good my lord , let him be forgiven for once , [ 194 ] And we will force him to the field hereafter .
Thou shew'st the difference 'twixt ourselves and thee , In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.KING OF JERUSALEM. Thy victories are grown so violent , That shortly heaven , fill 'd with the meteorsOf blood and fire thy tyrannies have made , Will pour down blood and fire on thy head , Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains , And , with our bloods , revenge our bloods [ 203 ] on thee .
Villains , these terrors , and these tyrannies ( If tyrannies war 's justice ye repute ) , I execute , enjoin 'd me from above , To scourge the pride of such as Heaven abhors ; Nor am I made arch-monarch of the world , Crown 'd and invested by the hand of Jove , For deeds of bounty or nobility ; But , since I exercise a greater name , The scourge of God and terror of the world , I must apply myself to fit those terms , In war , in blood , in death , in cruelty , And plague such peasants [ 204 ] as resist in [ 205 ] meThe power of Heaven 's eternal majesty. -- Theridamas , Techelles , and Casane , [ 206 ] Ransack the tents and the pavilionsOf these proud Turks , and take their concubines , Making them bury this effeminate brat ; For not a common soldier shall defileHis manly fingers with so faint a boy : Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent , And I 'll dispose them as it likes me best. -- Meanwhile , take him in .
We will , my lord. [ Exeunt with the body of CALYPHAS. ] KING OF JERUSALEM. O damned monster ! nay , a fiend of hell , Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine , Nor yet impos 'd with such a bitter hate !
Revenge it , [ 207 ] Rhadamanth and Aeacus , And let your hates , extended in his pains , Excel [ 208 ] the hate wherewith he pains our souls ! KING OF TREBIZON. May never day give virtue to his eyes , Whose sight , compos 'd of fury and of fire , Doth send such stern affections to his heart ! KING OF SORIA. May never spirit , vein , or artier , [ 209 ] feedThe cursed substance of that cruel heart ; But , wanting moisture and remorseful [ 210 ] blood , Dry up with anger , and consume with heat !
Distress 'd Olympia , whose weeping eyes , Since thy arrival here , behold [ 212 ] no sun , But , clos 'd within the compass of a [ 213 ] tent , Have [ 214 ] stain 'd thy cheeks , and made thee look like death , Devise some means to rid thee of thy life , Rather than yield to his detested suit , Whose drift is only to dishonour thee ; And , since this earth , dew 'd with thy brinish tears , Affords no herbs whose taste may poison thee , Nor yet this air , beat often with thy sighs , Contagious smells and vapours to infect thee , Nor thy close cave a sword to murder thee , Let this invention be the instrument.Enter THERIDAMAS .
Well met , Olympia : I sought thee in my tent , But , when I saw the place obscure and dark , Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light , Enrag 'd , I ran about the fields for thee , Supposing amorous Jove had sent his son , The winged Hermes , to convey thee hence ; But now I find thee , and that fear is past , Tell me , Olympia , wilt thou grant my suit ?
My lord and husband 's death , with my sweet son 's , ( With whom I buried all affectionsSave grief and sorrow , which torment my heart , ) Forbids my mind to entertain a thoughtThat tends to love , but meditate on death , A fitter subject for a pensive soul .
Olympia , pity him in whom thy looksHave greater operation and more forceThan Cynthia 's in the watery wilderness ; For with thy view my joys are at the full , And ebb again as thou depart'st from me .
Ah , pity me , my lord , and draw your sword , Making a passage for my troubled soul , Which beats against this prison to get out , And meet my husband and my loving son !
Nothing but still thy husband and thy son ? Leave this , my love , and listen more to me : Thou shalt be stately queen of fair Argier ; And , cloth 'd in costly cloth of massy gold , Upon the marble turrets of my courtSit like to Venus in her chair of state , Commanding all thy princely eye desires ; And I will cast off arms to [ 215 ] sit with thee , Spending my life in sweet discourse of love .
No such discourse is pleasant in [ 216 ] mine ears , But that where every period ends with death , And every line begins with death again : I can not love , to be an emperess .
Nay , lady , then , if nothing will prevail , I 'll use some other means to make you yield : Such is the sudden fury of my love , I must and will be pleas 'd , and you shall yield : Come to the tent again .
Stay now , my lord ; and , will you [ 217 ] save my honour , I 'll give your grace a present of such priceAs all the world can not afford the like .
What is it ?
An ointment which a cunning alchymistDistilled from the purest balsamumAnd simplest extracts of all minerals , In which the essential form of marble stone , Temper 'd by science metaphysical , And spells of magic from the mouths [ 218 ] of spirits , With which if you but 'noint your tender skin , Nor pistol , sword , nor lance , can pierce your flesh .
Why , madam , think you to mock me thus palpably ?
To prove it , I will 'noint my naked throat , Which when you stab , look on your weapon 's point , And you shall see't rebated [ 219 ] with the blow .
Why gave you not your husband some of it , If you lov 'd him , and it so precious ?
My purpose was , my lord , to spend it so , But was prevented by his sudden end ; And for a present easy proof thereof , [ 220 ] That I dissemble not , try it on me .
I will , Olympia , and will [ 221 ] keep it forThe richest present of this eastern world. [ She anoints her throat. [ 222 ] ]
Now stab , my lord , and mark your weapon 's point , That will be blunted if the blow be great .
Let me have coach , [ 234 ] my lord , that I may ride , And thus be drawn by [ 235 ] these two idle kings .
Thy youth forbids such ease , my kingly boy : They shall to-morrow draw my chariot , While these their fellow-kings may be refresh 'd .
O thou that sway'st the region under earth , And art a king as absolute as Jove , Come as thou didst in fruitful Sicily , Surveying all the glories of the land , And as thou took'st the fair Proserpina , Joying the fruit of Ceres ' garden-plot , [ 236 ] For love , for honour , and to make her queen , So , for just hate , for shame , and to subdueThis proud contemner of thy dreadful power , Come once in fury , and survey his pride , Haling him headlong to the lowest hell !
Your majesty must get some bits for these , To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues , That , like unruly never-broken jades , Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths , And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly .
Nay , we will break the hedges of their mouths , And pull their kicking colts [ 237 ] out of their pastures .
Your majesty already hath devis'dA mean , as fit as may be , to restrainThese coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy .
How like you that , sir king ? why speak you not ? KING OF JERUSALEM. Ah , cruel brat , sprung from a tyrant 's loins ! How like his cursed father he beginsTo practice taunts and bitter tyrannies !
Ay , Turk , I tell thee , this same [ 238 ] boy is heThat must ( advanc 'd in higher pomp than this ) Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave unsack 'd , If Jove , esteeming me too good for earth , Raise me , to match [ 239 ] the fair Aldeboran , Above [ 240 ] the threefold astracism of heaven , Before I conquer all the triple world. -- Now fetch me out the Turkish concubines : I will prefer them for the funeralThey have bestow 'd on my abortive son. [ The CONCUBINES are brought in. ] Where are my common soldiers now , that foughtSo lion-like upon Asphaltis ' plains ?
Here , my lord .
Hold ye , tall [ 241 ] soldiers , take ye queens a-piece , -- I mean such queens as were kings ' concubines ; Take them ; divide them , and their [ 242 ] jewels too , And let them equally serve all your turns .
We thank your majesty .
Brawl not , I warn you , for your lechery ; For every man that so offends shall die .
Injurious tyrant , wilt thou so defameThe hateful fortunes of thy victory , To exercise upon such guiltless damesThe violence of thy common soldiers ' lust ?
Live continent , [ 243 ] then , ye slaves , and meet not meWith troops of harlots at your slothful heels .
O , pity us , my lord , and save our honours !
Are ye not gone , ye villains , with your spoils ? [ The SOLDIERS run away with the CONCUBINES. ] KING OF JERUSALEM. O , merciless , infernal cruelty !
Save your honours ! 'twere but time indeed , Lost long before ye knew what honour meant .
It seems they meant to conquer us , my lord , And make us jesting pageants for their trulls .
And now themselves shall make our pageant , And common soldiers jest [ 244 ] with all their trulls.Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils , Till we prepare our march to Babylon , Whither we next make expedition .
Let us not be idle , then , my lord , But presently be prest [ 245 ] to conquer it .
What saith Maximus ?
My lord , the breach the enemy hath madeGives such assurance of our overthrow , That little hope is left to save our lives , Or hold our city from the conqueror 's hands.Then hang out [ 258 ] flags , my lord , of humble truce , And satisfy the people 's general prayers , That Tamburlaine 's intolerable wrathMay be suppress 'd by our submission .
Villain , respect'st thou [ 259 ] more thy slavish lifeThan honour of thy country or thy name ? Is not my life and state as dear to me , The city and my native country 's weal , As any thing of [ 260 ] price with thy conceit ? Have we not hope , for all our batter 'd walls , To live secure and keep his forces out , When this our famous lake of LimnasphaltisMakes walls a-fresh with every thing that fallsInto the liquid substance of his stream , More strong than are the gates of death or hell ? What faintness should dismay our courages , When we are thus defenc 'd against our foe , And have no terror but his threatening looks ? Enter , above , a CITIZEN , who kneels to the GOVERNOR .
My lord , if ever you did deed of ruth , And now will work a refuge to our lives , Offer submission , hang up flags of truce , That Tamburlaine may pity our distress , And use us like a loving conqueror.Though this be held his last day 's dreadful siege , Wherein he spareth neither man nor child , Yet are there Christians of Georgia here , Whose state he [ 261 ] ever pitied and reliev 'd , Will get his pardon , if your grace would send .
How [ 262 ] is my soul environed ! And this eterniz 'd [ 263 ] city BabylonFill 'd with a pack of faint-heart fugitivesThat thus entreat their shame and servitude ! Enter , above , a SECOND CITIZEN.SECOND CITIZEN. My lord , if ever you will win our hearts , Yield up the town , and [ 264 ] save our wives and children ; For I will cast myself from off these walls , Or die some death of quickest violence , Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine .
Villains , cowards , traitors to our state ! Fall to the earth , and pierce the pit of hell , That legions of tormenting spirits may vexYour slavish bosoms with continual pains ! I care not , nor the town will never yieldAs long as any life is in my breast.Enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES , with SOLDIERS .
Thou desperate governor of Babylon , To save thy life , and us a little labour , Yield speedily the city to our hands , Or else be sure thou shalt be forc 'd with painsMore exquisite than ever traitor felt .
Tyrant , I turn the traitor in thy throat , And will defend it in despite of thee. -- Call up the soldiers to defend these walls .
Yield , foolish governor ; we offer moreThan ever yet we did to such proud slavesAs durst resist us till our third day 's siege.Thou seest us prest [ 265 ] to give the last assault , And that shall bide no more regard of parle. [ 266 ]
Assault and spare not ; we will never yield. [ Alarms : and they scale the walls. ] Enter TAMBURLAINE , drawn in his chariot ( as before ) by theKINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA ; AMYRAS , CELEBINUS , USUMCASANE ; ORCANES king of Natolia , and the KING OF JERUSALEM , led bySOLDIERS ; [ 267 ] and others .
The stately buildings of fair Babylon , Whose lofty pillars , higher than the clouds , Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep , Being carried thither by the cannon 's force , Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltis ' lake , And make a bridge unto the batter 'd walls.Where Belus , Ninus , and great AlexanderHave rode in triumph , triumphs Tamburlaine , Whose chariot-wheels have burst [ 268 ] th ' Assyrians ' bones , Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses.Now in the place , where fair Semiramis , Courted by kings and peers of Asia , Hath trod the measures , [ 269 ] do my soldiers march ; And in the streets , where brave Assyrian damesHave rid in pomp like rich Saturnia , With furious words and frowning visagesMy horsemen brandish their unruly blades.Re-enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES , bringing in theGOVERNOR OF BABYLON.Who have ye there , my lords ?
The sturdy governor of Babylon , That made us all the labour for the town , And us 'd such slender reckoning of [ 270 ] your majesty .
Go , bind the villain ; he shall hang in chainsUpon the ruins of this conquer 'd town. -- Sirrah , the view of our vermilion tents ( Which threaten 'd more than if the regionNext underneath the element of fireWere full of comets and of blazing stars , Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth ) Could not affright you ; no , nor I myself , The wrathful messenger of mighty Jove , That with his sword hath quail 'd all earthly kings , Could not persuade you to submission , But still the ports [ 271 ] were shut : villain , I say , Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell , The triple-headed Cerberus would howl , And make [ 272 ] black Jove to crouch and kneel to me ; But I have sent volleys of shot to you , Yet could not enter till the breach was made .
Nor , if my body could have stopt the breach , Shouldst thou have enter 'd , cruel Tamburlaine.'Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yield , Nor yet thyself , the anger of the Highest ; For , though thy cannon shook the city-walls , [ 273 ] My heart did never quake , or courage faint .
Well , now I 'll make it quake. -- Go draw him [ 274 ] up , Hang him in [ 275 ] chains upon the city-walls , And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death .
Vile monster , born of some infernal hag , And sent from hell to tyrannize on earth , Do all thy worst ; nor death , nor Tamburlaine , Torture , or pain , can daunt my dreadless mind .
Up with him , then ! his body shall be scar'd. [ 276 ]
But , Tamburlaine , in Limnasphaltis ' lakeThere lies more gold than Babylon is worth , Which , when the city was besieg 'd , I hid : Save but my life , and I will give it thee .
Then , for all your valour , you would save your life ? Whereabout lies it ?
Under a hollow bank , right oppositeAgainst the western gate of Babylon .
Go thither , some of you , and take his gold : -- [ Exeunt some ATTENDANTS. ] The rest forward with execution.Away with him hence , let him speak no more. -- I think I make your courage something quail. -- [ Exeunt ATTENDANTS with the GOVERNOR or BABYLON. ] When this is done , we 'll march from Babylon , And make our greatest haste to Persia.These jades are broken-winded and half-tir 'd ; Unharness them , and let me have fresh horse. [ ATTENDANTS unharness the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA ] So ; now their best is done to honour me , Take them and hang them both up presently.KING OF TREBIZON.Vile [ 277 ] tyrant ! barbarous bloody Tamburlaine !
Take them away , Theridamas ; see them despatch 'd .
I will , my lord. [ Exit with the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA . ]
Come , Asian viceroys ; to your tasks a while , And take such fortune as your fellows felt .
First let thy Scythian horse tear both our limbs , Rather than we should draw thy chariot , And , like base slaves , abject our princely mindsTo vile and ignominious servitude.KING OF JERUSALEM. Rather lend me thy weapon , Tamburlaine , That I may sheathe it in this breast of mine.A thousand deaths could not torment our heartsMore than the thought of this doth vex our souls .
They will talk still , my lord , if you do not bridle them .
Bridle them , and let me to my coach. [ ATTENDANTS bridle ORCANES king of Natolia , and theKING OF JERUSALEM , and harness them to the chariot. -- The GOVERNOR OF BABYLON appears hanging in chainson the walls. -- Re-enter THERIDAMAS . ]
See , now , my lord , how brave the captain hangs !
'T is brave indeed , my boy : -- well done ! -- Shoot first , my lord , and then the rest shall follow .
Then have at him , to begin withal. [ THERIDAMAS shoots at the GOVERNOR . ]
Yet save my life , and let this wound appeaseThe mortal fury of great Tamburlaine !
No , though Asphaltis ' lake were liquid gold , And offer 'd me as ransom for thy life , Yet shouldst thou die. -- Shoot at him all at once. [ They shoot. ] So , now he hangs like Bagdet 's [ 278 ] governor , Having as many bullets in his fleshAs there be breaches in her batter 'd wall.Go now , and bind the burghers hand and foot , And cast them headlong in the city 's lake.Tartars and Persians shall inhabit there ; And , to command the city , I will buildA citadel , [ 279 ] that all Africa , Which hath been subject to the Persian king , Shall pay me tribute for in Babylon .
What shall be done with their wives and children , my lord ?
Techelles , drown them all , man , woman , and child ; Leave not a Babylonian in the town .
I will about it straight. -- Come , soldiers. [ Exit with SOLDIERS . ]
Now , Casane , where 's the Turkish Alcoran , And all the heaps of superstitious booksFound in the temples of that MahometWhom I have thought a god ? they shall be burnt .
Here they are , my lord .
I have fulfill 'd your highness ' will , my lord : Thousands of men , drown 'd in Asphaltis ' lake , Have made the water swell above the banks , And fishes , fed [ 286 ] by human carcasses , Amaz 'd , swim up and down upon [ 287 ] the waves , As when they swallow assafoetida , Which makes them fleet [ 288 ] aloft and gape [ 289 ] for air .
Well , then , my friendly lords , what now remains , But that we leave sufficient garrison , And presently depart to Persia , To triumph after all our victories ?
Ay , good my lord , let us in [ 290 ] haste to Persia ; And let this captain be remov 'd the wallsTo some high hill about the city here .
Let it be so ; -- about it , soldiers ; -- But stay ; I feel myself distemper 'd suddenly .
What is it dares distemper Tamburlaine ?
Something , Techelles ; but I know not what. -- But , forth , ye vassals ! [ 291 ] whatsoe'er [ 292 ] it be , Sickness or death can never conquer me. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE II.Enter CALLAPINE , KING OF AMASIA , a CAPTAIN , and train , with drums and trumpets .
King of Amasia , now our mighty hostMarcheth in Asia Major , where the streamsOf Euphrates [ 293 ] and Tigris swiftly run ; And here may we [ 294 ] behold great Babylon , Circled about with Limnasphaltis ' lake , Where Tamburlaine with all his army lies , Which being faint and weary with the siege , We may lie ready to encounter himBefore his host be full from Babylon , And so revenge our latest grievous loss , If God or Mahomet send any aid.KING OF AMASIA. Doubt not , my lord , but we shall conquer him : The monster that hath drunk a sea of blood , And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst , Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell ; And that vile carcass , drawn by warlike kings , The fowls shall eat ; for never sepulchreShall grace this [ 295 ] base-born tyrant Tamburlaine .
When I record [ 296 ] my parents ' slavish life , Their cruel death , mine own captivity , My viceroys ' bondage under Tamburlaine , Methinks I could sustain a thousand deaths , To be reveng 'd of all his villany. -- Ah , sacred Mahomet , thou that hast seenMillions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine , Kingdoms made waste , brave cities sack 'd and burnt , And but one host is left to honour thee , Aid [ 297 ] thy obedient servant Callapine , And make him , after all these overthrows , To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine ! KING OF AMASIA. Fear not , my lord : I see great Mahomet , Clothed in purple clouds , and on his headA chaplet brighter than Apollo 's crown , Marching about the air with armed men , To join with you against this Tamburlaine .
Renowmed [ 298 ] general , mighty Callapine , Though God himself and holy MahometShould come in person to resist your power , Yet might your mighty host encounter all , And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his kneesTo sue for mercy at your highness ' feet .
Captain , the force of Tamburlaine is great , His fortune greater , and the victoriesWherewith he hath so sore dismay 'd the worldAre greatest to discourage all our drifts ; Yet , when the pride of Cynthia is at full , She wanes again ; and so shall his , I hope ; For we have here the chief selected menOf twenty several kingdoms at the least ; Nor ploughman , priest , nor merchant , stays at home ; All Turkey is in arms with Callapine ; And never will we sunder camps and armsBefore himself or his be conquered : This is the time that must eternize meFor conquering the tyrant of the world.Come , soldiers , let us lie in wait for him , And , if we find him absent from his camp , Or that it be rejoin 'd again at full , Assail it , and be sure of victory. [ Exeunt. ] SCENE III.Enter THERIDAMAS , TECHELLES , and USUMCASANE .
Weep , heavens , and vanish into liquid tears ! Fall , stars that govern his nativity , And summon all the shining lamps of heavenTo cast their bootless fires to the earth , And shed their feeble influence in the air ; Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds ; For Hell and Darkness pitch their pitchy tents , And Death , with armies of Cimmerian spirits , Gives battle 'gainst the heart of Tamburlaine ! Now , in defiance of that wonted loveYour sacred virtues pour 'd upon his throne , And made his state an honour to the heavens , These cowards invisibly [ 299 ] assail his soul , And threaten conquest on our sovereign ; But , if he die , your glories are disgrac 'd , Earth droops , and says that hell in heaven is plac 'd !
O , then , ye powers that sway eternal seats , And guide this massy substance of the earth , If you retain desert of holiness , As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts , Be not inconstant , careless of your fame , Bear not the burden of your enemies ' joys , Triumphing in his fall whom you advanc 'd ; But , as his birth , life , health , and majestyWere strangely blest and governed by heaven , So honour , heaven , ( till heaven dissolved be , ) His birth , his life , his health , and majesty !
Blush , heaven , to lose the honour of thy name , To see thy footstool set upon thy head ; And let no baseness in thy haughty breastSustain a shame of such inexcellence , [ 300 ] To see the devils mount in angels ' thrones , And angels dive into the pools of hell ! And , though they think their painful date is out , And that their power is puissant as Jove 's , Which makes them manage arms against thy state , Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlaine ( Thy instrument and note of majesty ) Is greater far than they can thus subdue ; For , if he die , thy glory is disgrac 'd , Earth droops , and says that hell in heaven is plac 'd ! Enter TAMBURLAINE , [ 301 ] drawn in his chariot ( as before ) by ORCANES king of Natolia , and the KING OF JERUSALEM , AMYRAS , CELEBINUS , and Physicians .
What daring god torments my body thus , And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine ? Shall sickness prove me now to be a man , That have been term 'd the terror of the world ? Techelles and the rest , come , take your swords , And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul : Come , let us march against the powers of heaven , And set black streamers in the firmament , To signify the slaughter of the gods.Ah , friends , what shall I do ? I can not stand.Come , carry me to war against the gods , That thus envy the health of Tamburlaine .
Ah , good my lord , leave these impatient words , Which add much danger to your malady !
Why , shall I sit and languish in this pain ? No , strike the drums , and , in revenge of this , Come , let us charge our spears , and pierce his breastWhose shoulders bear the axis of the world , That , if I perish , heaven and earth may fade.Theridamas , haste to the court of Jove ; Will him to send Apollo hither straight , To cure me , or I 'll fetch him down myself .
Sit still , my gracious lord ; this grief will cease , [ 302 ] And can not last , it is so violent .
Not last , Techelles ! no , for I shall die.See , where my slave , the ugly monster Death , Shaking and quivering , pale and wan for fear , Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart , Who flies away at every glance I give , And , when I look away , comes stealing on ! -- Villain , away , and hie thee to the field ! I and mine army come to load thy backWith souls of thousand mangled carcasses. -- Look , where he goes ! but , see , he comes again , Because I stay ! Techelles , let us march , And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.FIRST PHYSICIAN. Pleaseth your majesty to drink this potion , Which will abate the fury of your fit , And cause some milder spirits govern you .
Tell me what think you of my sickness now ? FIRST PHYSICIAN. I view 'd your urine , and the hypostasis , [ 303 ] Thick and obscure , doth make your danger great : Your veins are full of accidental heat , Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried : The humidum and calor , which some holdIs not a parcel of the elements , But of a substance more divine and pure , Is almost clean extinguished and spent ; Which , being the cause of life , imports your death : Besides , my lord , this day is critical , Dangerous to those whose crisis is as yours : Your artiers , [ 304 ] which alongst the veins conveyThe lively spirits which the heart engenders , Are parch 'd and void of spirit , that the soul , Wanting those organons by which it moves , Can not endure , by argument of art.Yet , if your majesty may escape this day , No doubt but you shall soon recover all .
Then will I comfort all my vital parts , And live , in spite of death , above a day. [ Alarms within. ] Enter a Messenger .
My lord , young Callapine , that lately fledfrom your majesty , hath now gathered a fresh army , and , hearing your absence in the field , offers to set upon [ 305 ] uspresently .
See , my physicians , now , how Jove hath sentA present medicine to recure my pain ! My looks shall make them fly ; and , might I follow , There should not one of all the villain 's powerLive to give offer of another fight .
I joy , my lord , your highness is so strong , That can endure so well your royal presence , Which only will dismay the enemy .
I know it will , Casane. -- Draw , you slaves ! In spite of death , I will go shew my face. [ Alarms. Exit TAMBURLAINE with all the rest ( except thePHYSICIANS ) , and re-enter presently . ]
Alas , my lord , how should our bleeding hearts , Wounded and broken with your highness ' grief , Retain a thought of joy or spark of life ? Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects , [ 312 ] Whose matter is incorporate in your flesh .
Your pains do pierce our souls ; no hope survives , For by your life we entertain our lives .
But , sons , this subject , not of force enoughTo hold the fiery spirit it contains , Must part , imparting his impressionsBy equal portions into [ 313 ] both your breasts ; My flesh , divided in your precious shapes , Shall still retain my spirit , though I die , And live in all your seeds [ 314 ] immortally. -- Then now remove me , that I may resignMy place and proper title to my son. -- First , take my scourge and my imperial crown , And mount my royal chariot of estate , That I may see thee crown 'd before I die. -- Help me , my lords , to make my last remove. [ They assist TAMBURLAINE to descend from the chariot . ]
A woful change , my lord , that daunts our thoughtsMore than the ruin of our proper souls !
Sit up , my son , [ and ] let me see how wellThou wilt become thy father 's majesty .
With what a flinty bosom should I joyThe breath of life and burden of my soul , If not resolv 'd into resolved pains , My body 's mortified lineaments [ 315 ] Should exercise the motions of my heart , Pierc 'd with the joy of any dignity ! O father , if the unrelenting earsOf Death and Hell be shut against my prayers , And that the spiteful influence of HeavenDeny my soul fruition of her joy , How should I step , or stir my hateful feetAgainst the inward powers of my heart , Leading a life that only strives to die , And plead in vain unpleasing sovereignty !
Let not thy love exceed thine honour , son , Nor bar thy mind that magnanimityThat nobly must admit necessity.Sit up , my boy , and with these [ 316 ] silken reinsBridle the steeled stomachs of these [ 317 ] jades .
My lord , you must obey his majesty , Since fate commands and proud necessity .
Heavens witness me with what a broken heart [ Mounting the chariot. ] And damned [ 318 ] spirit I ascend this seat , And send my soul , before my father die , His anguish and his burning agony ! [ They crown AMYRAS . ]
Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate ; Let it be plac 'd by this my fatal chair , And serve as parcel of my funeral .
Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease , Nor may our hearts , all drown 'd in tears of blood , Joy any hope of your recovery ?
Casane , no ; the monarch of the earth , And eyeless monster that torments my soul , Can not behold the tears ye shed for me , And therefore still augments his cruelty .
Then let some god oppose his holy powerAgainst the wrath and tyranny of Death , That his tear-thirsty and unquenched hateMay be upon himself reverberate ! [ They bring in the hearse of ZENOCRATE . ]
Meet heaven and earth , and here let all things end , For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit , And heaven consum 'd his choicest living fire ! Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore , For both their worths will equal him no more ! [ Exeunt . ]
Accurs 'd be he that first invented war ! They knew not , ah , they knew not , simple men , How those were hit by pelting cannon-shotStand staggering like a quivering aspen-leafFearing the force of Boreas ' boisterous blasts ! ( page 16 ) In what a lamentable case were I , If nature had not given me wisdom 's lore ! For kings are clouts that every man shoots at , Our crown the pin that thousands seek to cleave : Therefore in policy I think it goodTo hide it close ; a goodly stratagem , And far from any man that is a fool : So shall not I be known ; or if I be , They can not take away my crown from me.Here will I hide it in this simple hole.Enter TAMBURLAINE .
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.The Project Gutenberg eBook , Hero and Leander , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Release Date : July 7 , 2006 [ eBook # 18781 ]
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone. For thirty years , he produced and distributed ProjectGutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions , all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.unless a copyright notice is included. Thus , we do not necessarilykeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.The Project Gutenberg EBook of Edward II. , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Marlowe 's Plays
Release Date : January 7 , 2007 [ EBook # 20288 ]
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDWARD II. ***Produced by Gustavo Daniel QueipoEDWARD THE SECONDBy Christopher MarloweDRAMATIS PERSONAEKING EDWARD THE SECOND.PRINCE EDWARD , his son , afterwards KING EDWARD THE THIRD.KENT , brother to KING EDWARD THE SECOND .
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.BISHOP OF COVENTRY.BISHOP OF WINCHESTER .
MORTIMER the elder.MORTIMER the younger , his nephew.SPENSER the elder.SPENSER the younger , his son .
SIR JOHN OF HAINAULT .
RICE AP HOWEL .
LORDS , POOR MEN , JAMES , MOWER , CHAMPION , MESSENGERS , SOLDIERS , and ATTENDANTS.QUEEN ISABELLA , wife to KING EDWARD THE SECOND.NIECE to KING EDWARD THE SECOND , daughter tothe DUKE OF GLOCESTER .
GAVESTON , reading a letter .
Come , Gaveston , And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend.Ah , words that make me surfeit with delight ! What greater bliss can hap to GavestonThan live and be the favourite of a king ! Sweet prince , I come ! these , thy amorous linesMight have enforc 'd me to have swum from France , And , like Leander , gasp 'd upon the sand , So thou wouldst smile , and take me in thine arms.The sight of London to my exil 'd eyesIs as Elysium to a new-come soul : Not that I love the city or the men , But that it harbours him I hold so dear , -- The king , upon whose bosom let me lie , And with the world be still at enmity.What need the arctic people love star-light , To whom the sun shines both by day and night ? Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers ! My knee shall bow to none but to the king.As for the multitude , that are but sparks , Rak 'd up in embers of their poverty , --
-- I 'll fawn first on the wind , That glanceth at my lips , and flieth away .
Poor Men.But how now ! what are these ?
Such as desire your worship 's service .
What canst thou do ?
I can ride .
But I have no horse. -- What art thou ?
A traveller .
Let me see ; thou wouldst do wellTo wait at my trencher , and tell me lies at dinner-time ; And , as I like your discoursing , I 'll have you. -- And what art thou ?
A soldier , that hath serv 'd against the Scot .
Why , there are hospitals for such as you : I have no war ; and therefore , sir , be gone .
Farewell , and perish by a soldier 's hand , That wouldst reward them with an hospital !
Ay , ay , these words of his move me as muchAs if a goose should play the porcupine , And dart her plumes , thinking to pierce my breast.But yet it is no pain to speak men fair ; I 'll flatter these , and make them live in hope. -- [ Aside.You know that I came lately out of France , And yet I have not view 'd my lord the king : If I speed well , I 'll entertain you all .
We thank your worship .
I have some business : leave me to myself .
We will wait here about the court .
KING EDWARD , KENT , LANCASTER , the elder MORTIMER,
MORTIMER , WARWICK , PEMBROKE , andAttendants .
Lancaster !
My lord ?
That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor. [ Aside .
Will you not grant me this ? -- In spite of themI 'll have my will ; and these two Mortimers , That cross me thus , shall know I am displeased. [ Aside .
If you love us , my lord , hate Gaveston .
That villain Mortimer ! I 'll be his death. [ Aside .
Mine uncle here , this earl , and I myself , Were sworn to your father at his death , That he should ne'er return into the realm : And now , my lord , ere I will break my oath , This sword of mine , that should offend your foes , Shall sleep within the scabbard at thy need , And underneath thy banners march who will , For Mortimer will hang his armour up .
[ Aside .
Well , Mortimer , I 'll make thee rue these words : Beseems it thee to contradict thy king ? Frown'st thou thereat , aspiring Lancaster ? The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows , And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff.I will have Gaveston ; and you shall knowWhat danger 't is to stand against your king .
Well done , Ned ! [ Aside .
My lord , why do you thus incense your peers , That naturally would love and honour you , But for that base and obscure Gaveston ? Four earldoms have I , besides Lancaster , -- Derby , Salisbury , Lincoln , Leicester ; These will I sell , to give my soldiers pay , Ere Gaveston shall stay within the realm : Therefore , if he be come , expel him straight .
Barons and earls , your pride hath made me mute ; But know I 'll speak , and to the proof , I hope.I do remember , in my father 's days , Lord Percy of the North , being highly mov 'd , Brav 'd Mowbray in presence of the king ; For which , had not his highness lov 'd him well , He should have lost his head ; but with his lookTh ' undaunted spirit of Percy was appeas 'd , And Mowbray and he were reconcil 'd : Yet dare you brave the king unto his face. -- Brother , revenge it , and let these their headsPreach upon poles , for trespass of their tongues .
O , our heads !
Ay , yours ; and therefore I would wish you grant .
Bridle thy anger , gentle Mortimer .
I can not , nor I will not ; I must speak. -- Cousin , our hands I hope shall fence our heads , And strike off his that makes you threaten us. -- Come , uncle , let us leave the brain-sick king , And henceforth parley with our naked swords .
Wiltshire hath men enough to save our heads .
All Warwickshire will leave him for my sake .
And northward Lancaster hath many friends. -- Adieu , my lord ; and either change your mind , Or look to see the throne , where you should sit , To float in blood , and at thy wanton headThe glozing head of thy base minion thrown. [ Exeunt all except King Edward , Kent , Gaveston , and attendants .
I can not brook these haughty menaces : Am I a king , and must be over-rul 'd ! -- Brother , display my ensigns in the field : I 'll bandy with the barons and the earls , And either die or live with Gaveston .
I can no longer keep me from my lord. [ Comes forward .
What , Gaveston ! welcome ! Kiss not my hand : Embrace me , Gaveston , as I do thee.Why shouldst thou kneel ? know'st thou not who I am ? Thy friend , thyself , another Gaveston : Not Hylas was more mourned for of HerculesThan thou hast been of me since thy exile .
And , since I went from hence , no soul in hellHath felt more torment than poor Gaveston .
I know it. -- Brother , welcome home my friend. -- Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire , And that high-minded Earl of Lancaster : I have my wish , in that I joy thy sight ; And sooner shall the sea o'erwhelm my landThan bear the ship that shall transport thee hence.I here create thee Lord High-chamberlain , Chief Secretary to the state and me , Earl of Cornwall , King and Lord of Man .
My lord , these titles far exceed my worth .
Brother , the least of these may well sufficeFor one of greater birth than Gaveston .
Cease , brother , for I can not brook these words. -- Thy worth , sweet friend , is far above my gifts : Therefore , to equal it , receive my heart.If for these dignities thou be envied , I 'll give thee more ; for , but to honour thee , Is Edward pleas 'd with kingly regiment.Fear'st thou thy person ? thou shalt have a guard : Wantest thou gold ? go to my treasury : Wouldst thou be lov 'd and fear 'd ? receive my seal , Save or condemn , and in our name commandWhat so thy mind affects , or fancy likes .
It shall suffice me to enjoy your love ; Which whiles I have , I think myself as greatAs Cæsar riding in the Roman street , With captive kings at his triumphant car .
BISHOP OF COVENTRY .
Whither goes my Lord of Coventry so fast ?
To celebrate your father 's exequies.But is that wicked Gaveston return 'd ?
Ay , priest , and lives to be reveng 'd on thee , That wert the only cause of his exile .
'T is true ; and , but for reverence of these robes , Thou shouldst not plod one foot beyond this place .
I did no more than I was bound to do : And , Gaveston , unless thou be reclaim 'd , As then I did incense the parliament , So will I now , and thou shalt back to France .
Saving your reverence , you must pardon me .
Throw off his golden mitre , rend his stole , And in the channel christen him anew .
Ay , brother , lay not violent hands on him ! For he 'll complain unto the see of Rome .
Let him complain unto the see of hell : I 'll be reveng 'd on him for my exile .
No , spare his life , but seize upon his goods : Be thou lord bishop , and receive his rents , And make him serve thee as thy chaplain : I give him thee ; here , use him as thou wilt .
He shall to prison , and there die in bolts .
Ay , to the Tower , the Fleet , or where thou wilt .
For this offence be thou accurs 'd of God !
Who 's there ? Convey this priest to the Tower .
True , true .
But , in the meantime , Gaveston , away , And take possession of his house and goods.Come , follow me , and thou shalt have my guardTo see it done , and bring thee safe again .
What should a priest do with so fair a house ? A prison may beseem his holiness. [ Exeunt .
MORTIMER , and the youngerMORTIMER ; on the other , WARWICK , and LANCASTER .
'T is true , the bishop is in the Tower , And goods and body given to Gaveston .
What , will they tyrannise upon the church ? Ah , wicked King ! accursed Gaveston ! This ground , which is corrupted with their steps , Shall be their timeless sepulchre or mine .
Well , let that peevish Frenchman guard him sure ; Unless his breast be sword-proof , he shall die .
How now ! why droops the Earl of Lancaster ?
Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent ?
That villain Gaveston is made an earl .
An earl !
Ay , and besides Lord-chamberlain of the realm , And Secretary too , and Lord of Man .
We may not nor we will not suffer this .
Why post we not from hence to levy men ?
`` My Lord of Cornwall '' now at every word ; And happy is the man whom he vouchsafes , For vailing of his bonnet , one good look.Thus , arm in arm , the king and he doth march : Nay , more , the guard upon his lordship waits , And all the court begins to flatter him .
Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king , He nods , and scorns , and smiles at those that pass .
Doth no man take exceptions at the slave ?
All stomach him , but none dare speak a word .
Ah , that bewrays their baseness , Lancaster ! Were all the earls and barons of my mind , We 'd hale him from the bosom of the king , And at the court-gate hang the peasant up , Who , swoln with venom of ambitious pride , Will be the ruin of the realm and us .
Here comes my Lord of Canterbury 's grace .
His countenance bewrays he is displeas 'd .
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY , and anAttendant .
First , were his sacred garments rent and torn ; Then laid they violent hands upon him ; next , Himself imprison 'd , and his goods asseiz 'd : This certify the Pope : away , take horse. [ Exit Attendant .
My lord , will you take arms against the king ?
What need I ? God himself is up in armsWhen violence is offer 'd to the church .
Then will you join with us , that be his peers , To banish or behead that Gaveston ?
What else , my lords ? for it concerns me near ; The bishoprick of Coventry is his .
QUEEN ISABELLA .
Madam , whither walks your majesty so fast ?
Unto the forest , gentle Mortimer , To live in grief and baleful discontent ; For now my lord the king regards me not , But dotes upon the love of Gaveston : He claps his cheeks , and hangs about his neck , Smiles in his face , and whispers in his ears ; And , when I come , he frowns , as who should say , '' Go whither thou wilt , seeing I have Gaveston . ''
Is it not strange that he is thus bewitch 'd ?
Madam , return unto the court again : That sly inveigling Frenchman we 'll exile , Or lose our lives ; and yet , ere that day come , The king shall lose his crown ; for we have power , And courage too , to be reveng 'd at full .
But yet lift not your swords against the king .
No ; but we will lift Gaveston from hence .
And war must be the means , or he 'll stay still .
Then let him stay ; for , rather than my lordShall be oppress 'd with civil mutinies , I will endure a melancholy life , And let him frolic with his minion .
My lords , to ease all this , but hear me speak : We and the rest , that are his counsellors , Will meet , and with a general consentConfirm his banishment with our hands and seals .
What we confirm the king will frustrate .
Then may we lawfully revolt from him .
But say , my lord , where shall this meeting be ?
At the New Temple .
Content .
And , in the meantime , I 'll entreat you allTo cross to Lambeth , and there stay with me .
Come , then , let 's away .
Madam , farewell .
Farewell , sweet Mortimer , and , for my sake , Forbear to levy arms against the king .
Ay , if words will serve ; if not , I must. [ Exeunt .
GAVESTON and KENT .
Edmund , the mighty prince of Lancaster , That hath more earldoms than an ass can bear , And both the Mortimers , two goodly men , With Guy of Warwick , that redoubted knight , Are gone towards Lambeth : there let them remain. [ Exeunt .
LANCASTER , WARWICK , PEMBROKE , the elderMORTIMER , the younger MORTIMER , the ARCHBISHOPOF CANTERBURY , and Attendants .
Here is the form of Gaveston 's exile ; May it please your lordship to subscribe your name .
Give me the paper. [ He subscribes , as the others do after him .
Quick , quick , my lord ; I long to write my name .
But I long more to see him banish 'd hence .
The name of Mortimer shall fright the king , Unless he be declin 'd from that base peasant .
KING EDWARD , GAVESTON , and KENT .
What , are you mov 'd that Gaveston sits here ? It is our pleasure ; we will have it so .
Your grace doth well to place him by your side , For nowhere else the new earl is so safe .
What man of noble birth can brook this sight ?
See , what a scornful look the peasant casts !
Can kingly lions fawn on creeping ants ?
Ignoble vassal , that , like Phaeton , Aspir'st unto the guidance of the sun !
Their downfall is at hand , their forces down : We will not thus be fac 'd and over-peer 'd .
Lay hands on that traitor Mortimer !
Lay hands on that traitor Gaveston !
Is this the duty that you owe your king ?
We know our duties ; let him know his peers .
Whither will you bear him ? stay , or ye shall die .
We are no traitors ; therefore threaten not .
No , threaten not , my lord , but pay them home.Were I a king --
Thou , villain ! wherefore talk'st thou of a king , That hardly art a gentleman by birth ?
Were he a peasant , being my minion , I 'll make the proudest of you stoop to him .
My lord -- you may not thus disparage us. -- Away , I say , with hateful Gaveston !
And with the Earl of Kent that favours him. [ Attendants remove Gaveston and Kent .
Nay , then , lay violent hands upon your king : Here , Mortimer , sit thou in Edward 's throne ; Warwick and Lancaster , wear you my crown.Was ever king thus over-rul 'd as I ?
Learn , then , to rule us better , and the realm .
What we have done , our heart-blood shall maintain .
Think you that we can brook this upstart [ 's ] pride ?
Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech .
Why are you not mov 'd ? be patient , my lord , And see what we your counsellors have done .
My lords , now let us all be resolute , And either have our wills , or lose our lives .
Meet you for this , proud over-daring peers ! Ere my sweet Gaveston shall part from me , This isle shall fleet upon the ocean , And wander to the unfrequented Inde .
You know that I am legate to the Pope : On your allegiance to the see of Rome , Subscribe , as we have done , to his exile .
Curse him , if he refuse ; and then may weDepose him , and elect another king .
Ay , there it goes ! but yet I will not yield : Curse me , depose me , do the worst you can .
Then linger not , my lord , but do it straight .
Remember how the bishop was abus 'd : Either banish him that was the cause thereof , Or I will presently discharge these lordsOf duty and allegiance due to thee .
It boots me not to threat ; I must speak fair : The legate of the Pope will be obey'd. -- [ Aside.My lord , you shall be Chancellor of the realm ; Thou , Lancaster , High-Admiral of our fleet ; Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls ; And you , Lord Warwick , President of the North ; And thou of Wales. If this content you not , Make several kingdoms of this monarchy , And share it equally amongst you all , So I may have some nook or corner left , To frolic with my dearest Gaveston .
Nothing shall alter us ; we are resolv 'd .
Come , come , subscribe .
Why should you love him whom the world hates so ?
Because he loves me more than all the world.Ah , none but rude and savage-minded menWould seek the ruin of my Gaveston ! You that be noble-born should pity him .
You that are princely-born should shake him off : For shame , subscribe , and let the lown depart .
Urge him , my lord .
Are you content to banish him the realm ?
I see I must , and therefore am content : Instead of ink , I 'll write it with my tears. [ Subscribes .
The king is love-sick for his minion .
'T is done : and now , accursed hand , fall off !
Give it me : I 'll have it publish 'd in the streets .
I 'll see him presently despatch 'd away .
Now is my heart at ease .
And so is mine .
This will be good news to the common sort .
Be it or no , he shall not linger here. [ Exeunt all except King Edward .
How fast they run to banish him I love ! They would not stir , were it to do me good.Why should a king be subject to a priest ? Proud Rome , that hatchest such imperial grooms , With these thy superstitious taper-lights , Wherewith thy antichristian churches blaze , I 'll fire thy crazed buildings , and enforceThe papal towers to kiss the lowly ground , With slaughter 'd priests make Tiber 's channel swell , And banks rais 'd higher with their sepulchres ! As for the peers , that back the clergy thus , If I be king , not one of them shall live .
GAVESTON .
My lord , I hear it whisper 'd everywhere , That I am banish 'd and must fly the land .
'T is true , sweet Gaveston : O were it false ! The legate of the Pope will have it so , And thou must hence , or I shall be depos'd.But I will reign to be reveng 'd of them ; And therefore , sweet friend , take it patiently.Live where thou wilt , I 'll send thee gold enough ; And long thou shalt not stay ; or , if thou dost , I 'll come to thee ; my love shall ne'er decline .
Is all my hope turn 'd to this hell of grief ?
Rend not my heart with thy too-piercing words : Thou from this land , I from myself am banish 'd .
To go from hence grieves not poor Gaveston ; But to forsake you , in whose gracious looksThe blessedness of Gaveston remains ; For nowhere else seeks he felicity .
And only this torments my wretched soul , That , whether I will or no , thou must depart.Be governor of Ireland in my stead , And there abide till fortune call thee home.Here , take my picture , and let me wear thine : [ They exchange pictures.O , might I keep thee here , as I do this , Happy were I ! but now most miserable .
'T is something to be pitied of a king .
Thou shalt not hence ; I 'll hide thee , Gaveston .
I shall be found , and then 'twill grieve me more .
Kind words and mutual talk makes our grief greater : Therefore , with dumb embracement , let us part , Stay , Gaveston ; I can not leave thee thus .
For every look , my love drops down a tear : Seeing I must go , do not renew my sorrow .
The time is little that thou hast to stay , And , therefore , give me leave to look my fill.But , come , sweet friend ; I 'll bear thee on thy way .
The peers will frown .
I pass not for their anger. Come , let 's go : O , that we might as well return as go !
QUEEN ISABELLA .
Whither goes my lord ?
Fawn not on me , French strumpet ; get thee gone !
On whom but on my husband should I fawn ?
On Mortimer ; with whom , ungentle queen , -- I judge no more -- judge you the rest , my lord .
In saying this , thou wrong'st me , Gaveston : Is't not enough that thou corrupt'st my lord , And art a bawd to his affections , But thou must call mine honour thus in question ?
I mean not so ; your grace must pardon me .
Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer , And by thy means is Gaveston exil 'd : But I would wish thee reconcile the lords , Or thou shalt ne'er be reconcil 'd to me .
Your highness knows , it lies not in my power .
Away , then ! touch me not. -- Come , Gaveston .
Villain , 't is thou that robb'st me of my lord .
Madam , 't is you that rob me of my lord .
Speak not unto her : let her droop and pine .
Wherein , my lord , have I deserv 'd these words ? Witness the tears that Isabella sheds , Witness this heart , that , sighing for thee , breaks , How dear my lord is to poor Isabel !
And witness heaven how dear thou art to me : There weep ; for , till my Gaveston be repeal 'd , Assure thyself thou com'st not in my sight. [ Exeunt King Edward and Gaveston .
O miserable and distressed queen ! Would , when I left sweet France , and was embarked , That charming Circe , walking on the waves , Had chang 'd my shape ! or at the marriage-dayThe cup of Hymen had been full of poison ! Or with those arms , that twin 'd about my neck , I had been stifled , and not liv 'd to seeThe king my lord thus to abandon me ! Like frantic Juno , will I fill the earthWith ghastly murmur of my sighs and cries ; For never doted Jove on GanymedeSo much as he on cursed Gaveston : But that will more exasperate his wrath ; I must entreat him , I must speak him fair , And be a means to call home Gaveston : And yet he 'll ever dote on Gaveston ; And so am I for ever miserable .
LANCASTER , WARWICK , PEMBROKE , the elderMORTIMER , and the younger MORTIMER .
Look , where the sister of the king of FranceSits wringing of her hands and beats her breast !
The king , I fear , hath ill-treated her .
Hard is the heart that injures such a saint .
I know 't is 'long of Gaveston she weeps .
Why , he is gone .
Madam , how fares your grace ?
Ah , Mortimer , now breaks the king 's hate forth , And he confesseth that he loves me not !
Cry quittance , madam , then , and love not him .
No , rather will I die a thousand deaths : And yet I love in vain ; he 'll ne'er love me .
Fear ye not , madam ; now his minion 's gone , His wanton humour will be quickly left .
O , never , Lancaster ! I am enjoin 'd , To sue unto you all for his repeal : This wills my lord , and this must I perform , Or else be banish 'd from his highness ' presence .
For his repeal , madam ! he comes not back , Unless the sea cast up his shipwreck 'd body .
And to behold so sweet a sight as that , There 's none here but would run his horse to death .
But , madam , would you have us call him home ?
Ay , Mortimer , for , till he be restor 'd , The angry king hath banish 'd me the court ; And , therefore , as thou lov'st and tender'st me , Be thou my advocate unto these peers .
What , would you have me plead for Gaveston ?
Plead for him that will , I am resolv 'd .
And so am I , my lord : dissuade the queen .
O , Lancaster , let him dissuade the king ! For 't is against my will he should return .
Then speak not for him ; let the peasant go .
'T is for myself I speak , and not for him .
No speaking will prevail ; and therefore cease .
Fair queen , forbear to angle for the fishWhich , being caught , strikes him that takes it dead ; I mean that vile torpedo , Gaveston , That now , I hope , floats on the Irish seas .
Sweet Mortimer , sit down by me a while , And I will tell thee reasons of such weightAs thou wilt soon subscribe to his repeal .
It is impossible : but speak your mind .
Then , thus ; -- but none shall hear it but ourselves. [ Talks to Y. Mor. apart .
My lords , albeit the queen win Mortimer , Will you be resolute and hold with me ?
Not I , against my nephew .
Fear not ; the queen 's words can not alter him .
No ? do but mark how earnestly she pleads !
And see how coldly his looks make denial !
She smiles : now , for my life , his mind is chang 'd !
I 'll rather lose his friendship , I , than grant .
Well , of necessity it must be so. -- My lords , that I abhor base GavestonI hope your honours make no question.And therefore , though I plead for his repeal , 'T is not for his sake , but to our avail ; Nay , for the realm 's behoof , and for the king 's .
Fie , Mortimer , dishonour not thyself ! Can this be true , 't was good to banish him ? And is this true , to call him home again ? Such reasons make white black , and dark night day .
My Lord of Lancaster , mark the respect .
In no respect can contraries be true .
Yet , good my lord , hear what he can allege .
All that he speaks is nothing ; we are resolv 'd .
Do you not wish that Gaveston were dead ?
I would he were !
Why , then , my lord , give me but leave to speak .
But , nephew , do not play the sophister .
This which I urge is of a burning zealTo mend the king and do our country good.Know you not Gaveston hath store of gold , Which may in Ireland purchase him such friendsAs he will front the mightiest of us all ? And whereas he shall live and be belov 'd , 'T is hard for us to work his overthrow .
Mark you but that , my lord of Lancaster .
But , were he here , detested as he is , How easily might some base slave be suborn'dTo greet his lordship with a poniard , And none so much as blame the murderer , But rather praise him for that brave attempt , And in the chronicle enrol his nameFor purging of the realm of such a plague !
He saith true .
Ay , but how chance this was not done before ?
Because , my lords , it was not thought upon.Nay , more , when he shall know it lies in usTo banish him , and then to call him home , 'Twill make him vail the top flag of his pride , And fear to offend the meanest nobleman .
But how if he do not , nephew ?
Then may we with some colour rise in arms ; For , howsoever we have borne it out , 'T is treason to be up against the king ; So shall we have the people of our side , Which , for his father 's sake , lean to the king , But can not brook a night-grown mushroom , Such a one as my Lord of Cornwall is , Should bear us down of the nobility : And , when the commons and the nobles join , 'T is not the king can buckler Gaveston ; We 'll pull him from the strongest hold he hath.My lords , if to perform this I be slack , Think me as base a groom as Gaveston .
On that condition Lancaster will grant .
And so will Pembroke and I .
And I .
In this I count me highly gratified , And Mortimer will rest at your command .
And when this favour Isabel forgets , Then let her live abandon 'd and forlorn. -- But see , in happy time , my lord the king , Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way , Is new return'd. This news will glad him much : Yet not so much as me ; I love him moreThan he can Gaveston : would he lov 'd meBut half so much ! then were I treble-blest .
KING EDWARD , mourning .
He 's gone , and for his absence thus I mourn : Did never sorrow go so near my heartAs doth the want of my sweet Gaveston ; And , could my crown 's revenue bring him back , I would freely give it to his enemies , And think I gain 'd , having bought so dear a friend .
Hark , how he harps upon his minion !
My heart is as an anvil unto sorrow , Which beats upon it like the Cyclops ' hammers , And with the noise turns up my giddy brain , And makes me frantic for my Gaveston.Ah , had some bloodless Fury rose from hell , And with my kingly sceptre struck me dead , When I was forc 'd to leave my Gaveston !
what passions call you these ?
My gracious lord , I come to bring you news .
That you have parled with your Mortimer ?
That Gaveston , my lord , shall be repeal 'd .
Repeal 'd ! the news is too sweet to be true .
But will you love me , if you find it so ?
If it be so , what will not Edward do ?
For Gaveston , but not for Isabel .
For thee , fair queen , if thou lov'st Gaveston ; I 'll hang a golden tongue about thy neck , Seeing thou hast pleaded with so good success .
No other jewels hang about my neckThan these , my lord ; nor let me have more wealthThan I may fetch from this rich treasury.O , how a kiss revives poor Isabel !
Once more receive my hand ; and let this beA second marriage 'twixt thyself and me .
And may it prove more happy than the first ! My gentle lord , bespeak these nobles fair , That wait attendance for a gracious look , And on their knees salute your majesty .
Courageous Lancaster , embrace thy king ; And , as gross vapours perish by the sun , Even so let hatred with thy sovereign 's smile : Live thou with me as my companion .
This salutation overjoys my heart .
Warwick shall be my chiefest counsellor : These silver hairs will more adorn my courtThan gaudy silks or rich embroidery.Chide me , sweet Warwick , if I go astray .
Slay me , my lord , when I offend your grace .
In solemn triumphs and in public showsPembroke shall bear the sword before the king .
And with this sword Pembroke will fight for you .
But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside ? Be thou commander of our royal fleet ; Or , if that lofty office like thee not , I make thee here Lord Marshal of the realm .
My lord , I 'll marshal so your enemies , As England shall be quiet , and you safe .
And as for you , Lord Mortimer of Chirke , Whose great achievements in our foreign warDeserve no common place nor mean reward , Be you the general of the levied troopsThat now are ready to assail the Scots .
In this your grace hath highly honour 'd me , For with my nature war doth best agree .
Now is the king of England rich and strong , Having the love of his renowmed peers .
Ay , Isabel , ne'er was my heart so light. -- Clerk of the crown , direct our warrant forth , For Gaveston , to Ireland !
BEAUMONT with warrant.Beaumont , flyAs fast as Iris or Jove 's Mercury .
It shall be done , my gracious lord. [ Exit .
Lord Mortimer , we leave you to your charge.Now let us in , and feast it royally.Against our friend the Earl of Cornwall comesWe 'll have a general tilt and tournament ; And then his marriage shall be solemnis 'd ; For wot you not that I have made him sureUnto our cousin , the Earl of Glocester 's heir ?
Such news we hear , my lord .
That day , if not for him , yet for my sake , Who in the triumph will be challenger , Spare for no cost ; we will requite your love .
In this or aught your highness shall command us .
Thanks , gentle Warwick. Come , lets in and revel. [ Exeunt all except the elder Mortimer and theyounger Mortimer .
Nephew , I must to Scotland ; thou stay'st here.Leave now to oppose thyself against the king : Thou seest by nature he is mild and calm ; And , seeing his mind so dotes on Gaveston , Let him without controlment have his will.The mightiest kings have had their minions ; Great Alexander lov 'd Hephæstion , The conquering Hercules for Hylas wept , And for Patroclus stern Achilles droop'dAnd not kings only , but the wisest men ; The Roman Tully lov 'd Octavius , Grave Socrates wild Alcibiades.Then let his grace , whose youth is flexible , And promiseth as much as we can wish , Freely enjoy that vain light-headed earl ; For riper years will wean him from such toys .
Uncle , his wanton humour grieves not me ; But this I scorn , that one so basely-bornShould by his sovereign 's favour grow so pert , And riot it with the treasure of the realm , While soldiers mutiny for want of pay.He wears a lord 's revenue on his back , And , Midas-like , he jets it in the court , With base outlandish cullions at his heels , Whose proud fantastic liveries make such showAs if that Proteus , god of shapes , appear'd.I have not seen a dapper Jack so brisk : He wears a short Italian hooded cloak , Larded with pearl , and in his Tuscan capA jewel of more value than the crown.While others walk below , the king and he , From out a window , laugh at such as we , And flout our train , and jest at our attire.Uncle , 't is this that makes me impatient .
But , nephew , now you see the king is chang 'd .
Then so I am , and live to do him service : But , whiles I have a sword , a hand , a heart , I will not yield to any such upstart.You know my mind : come , uncle , let 's away. [ Exeunt .
SPENSER and BALDOCK .
Spenser , Seeing that our lord the Earl of Glocester 's dead , Which of the nobles dost thou mean to serve ?
Not Mortimer , nor any of his side , Because the king and he are enemies.Baldock , learn this of me : a factious lordShall hardly do himself good , much less us ; But he that hath the favour of a kingMay with one word advance us while we live.The liberal Earl of Cornwall is the manOn whose good fortune Spenser 's hope depends .
What , mean you , then , to be his follower ?
No , his companion ; for he loves me well , And would have once preferr 'd me to the king .
But he is banish 'd ; there 's small hope of him .
Ay , for a while ; but , Baldock , mark the end.A friend of mine told me in secrecyThat he 's repeal 'd and sent for back again ; And even now a post came from the courtWith letters to our lady from the king ; And , as she read , she smil 'd ; which makes me thinkIt is about her lover Gaveston .
'T is like enough ; for , since he was exil 'd , She neither walks abroad nor comes in sight.But I had thought the match had been broke off , And that his banishment had chang 'd her mind .
Our lady 's first love is not wavering ; My life for thine , she will have Gaveston .
Then hope I by her means to be preferr 'd , Having read unto her since she was a child .
Then , Baldock , you must cast the scholar off , And learn to court it like a gentleman.'Tis not a black coat and a little band , A velvet-cap 'd cloak , fac 'd before with serge , And smelling to a nosegay all the day , Or holding of a napkin in your hand , Or saying a long grace at a table 's end , Or making low legs to a nobleman , Or looking downward , with your eye-lids close , And saying , `` Truly , a n't may please your honour , '' Can get you any favour with great men : You must be proud , bold , pleasant , resolute , And now and then stab , as occasion serves .
Spenser , thou know'st I hate such formal toys , And use them but of mere hypocrisy.Mine old lord , whiles he liv 'd , was so precise , That he would take exceptions at my buttons , And , being like pins ' heads , blame me for the bigness ; Which made me curate-like in mine attire , Though inwardly licentious enough , And apt for any kind of villany.I am none of these common pedants , I , That can not speak without propterea quod .
But one of those that saith quando-quidem , And hath a special gift to form a verb .
Leave off this jesting ; here my lady comes .
KING EDWARD 'S Niece .
The grief for his exile was not so muchAs is the joy of his returning home.This letter came from my sweet Gaveston : What need'st thou , love , thus to excuse thyself ? I know thou couldst not come and visit me. [ Reads .
This argues the entire love of my lord ; -- [ Reads .
But stay thee here where Gaveston shall sleep. [ Puts the letter into her bosom.Now to the letter of my lord the king : He wills me to repair unto the court , And meet my Gaveston : why do I stay , Seeing that he talks thus of my marriage day ? -- Who 's there ? Baldock ! See that my coach be ready ; I must hence .
It shall be done , madam .
And meet me at the park-pale presently [ Exit Baldock.Spenser , stay you , and bear me company , For I have joyful news to tell thee of ; My lord of Cornwall is a-coming over , And will be at the court as soon as we .
I knew the king would have him home again .
If all things sort out , as I hope they will , Thy service , Spenser , shall be thought upon .
I humbly thank your ladyship .
Come , lead the way : I long till I am there. [ Exeunt .
KING EDWARD , QUEEN ISABELLA , KENT , LANCASTER,
MORTIMER , WARWICK , PEMBROKE , andAttendants .
The wind is good ; I wonder why he stays : I fear me he is wreck 'd upon the sea .
Look , Lancaster , how passionate he is , And still his mind runs on his minion !
My lord , --
How now ! what news ? is Gaveston arriv 'd ?
Nothing but Gaveston ! what means your grace ? You have matters of more weight to think upon : The King of France sets foot in Normandy .
A trifle ! we 'll expel him when we please.But tell me , Mortimer , what 's thy deviceAgainst the stately triumph we decreed ?
A homely one , my lord , not worth the telling .
Pray thee , let me know it .
But , seeing you are so desirous , thus it is ; A lofty cedar tree , fair flourishing , On whose top branches kingly eagles perch , And by the bark a canker creeps me up , And gets unto the highest bough of all ; The motto , Æque tandem .
And what is yours , my Lord of Lancaster ?
My lord , mine 's more obscure than Mortimer's.Pliny reports , there is a flying-fishWhich all the other fishes deadly hate , And therefore , being pursu 'd , it takes the air : No sooner is it up , but there 's a fowlThat seizeth it : this fish , my lord , I bear ; The motto this , Undique mors est .
Proud Mortimer ! ungentle Lancaster ! Is this the love you bear your sovereign ? Is this the fruit your reconcilement bears ? Can you in words make show of amity , And in your shields display your rancorous minds ? What call you this but private libellingAgainst the Earl of Cornwall and my brother ?
Sweet husband , be content ; they all love you .
They love me not that hate my Gaveston.I am that cedar ; shake me not too much ; And you the eagles ; soar ye ne'er so high , I have the jesses that will pull you down ; And Æque tandem shall that canker cryUnto the proudest peer of Britainy.Thou that compar'st him to a flying-fish , And threaten'st death whether he rise or fall , 'T is not the hugest monster of the sea , Nor foulest harpy , that shall swallow him .
If in his absence thus he favours him , What will he do whenas he shall be present ?
That shall we see : look , where his lordship come !
GAVESTON .
My Gaveston ! Welcome to Tynmouth ! welcome to thy friend ! Thy absence made me droop and pine away ; For , as the lovers of fair Danaë , When she was lock 'd up in a brazen tower , Desir 'd her more , and wax 'd outrageous , So did it fare with me : and now thy sightIs sweeter far than was thy parting henceBitter and irksome to my sobbing heart .
Sweet lord and king , your speech preventeth mine ; Yet have I words left to express my joy : The shepherd , nipt with biting winter 's rage , Frolics not more to see the painted springThan I do to behold your majesty .
Will none of you salute my Gaveston ?
Salute him ! yes. -- Welcome , Lord Chamberlain !
Welcome is the good Earl of Cornwall !
Welcome , Lord Governor of the Isle of Man !
Welcome , Master Secretary !
Brother , do you hear them ?
Still will these earls and barons use me thus ?
My lord , I can not brook these injuries .
Ay me , poor soul , when these begin to jar ! [ Aside .
Return it to their throats ; I 'll be thy warrant .
Base , leaden earls , that glory in your birth , Go sit at home , and eat your tenants ' beef ; And come not here to scoff at Gaveston , Whose mounting thoughts did never creep so lowAs to bestow a look on such as you .
Yet I disdain not to do this for you. [ Draws his sword , and offers to stab Gaveston .
Treason ! treason ! where 's the traitor ?
Here , here !
Convey hence Gaveston ; they 'll murder him .
The life of thee shall salve this foul disgrace .
Villain , thy life ! unless I miss mine aim. [ Wounds Gaveston .
Ah , furious Mortimer , what hast thou done .
No more than I would answer , were he slain. [ Exit Gaveston with Attendants .
Yes , more than thou canst answer , though he live : Dear shall you both abide this riotous deed : Out of my presence ! come not near the court .
I 'll not be barr 'd the court for Gaveston .
We 'll hale him by the ears unto the block .
Look to your own heads ; his is sure enough .
Look to your own crown , if you back him thus .
Warwick , these words do ill beseem thy years .
Nay , all of them conspire to cross me thus : But , if I live , I 'll tread upon their headsThat think with high looks thus to tread me down.Come , Edmund , let 's away , and levy men : 'T is war that must abate these barons ' pride. [ Exeunt King Edward , Queen Isabella , and Kent .
Let 's to our castles , for the king is mov 'd .
Mov 'd may he be , and perish in his wrath !
Cousin , it is no dealing with him now ; He means to make us stoop by force of arms : And therefore let us jointly here protestTo prosecute that Gaveston to the death .
By heaven , the abject villain shall not live !
I 'll have his blood , or die in seeking it .
The like oath Pembroke takes .
And so doth Lancaster.Now send our heralds to defy the king ; And make the people swear to put him down .
Messenger .
Letters ! from whence ?
From Scotland , my lord. [ Giving letters to Mortimer .
Why , how now , cousin ! how fare all our friends ?
My uncle 's taken prisoner by the Scots .
We 'll have him ransom 'd , man : be of good cheer .
They rate his ransom at five thousand pound.Who should defray the money but the king , Seeing he is taken prisoner in his wars ? I 'll to the king .
Do , cousin , and I 'll bear thee company .
Meantime my Lord of Pembroke and myselfWill to Newcastle here , and gather head .
About it , then , and we will follow you .
Be resolute and full of secrecy .
I warrant you. [ Exit with Pembroke .
Cousin , an if he will not ransom him , I 'll thunder such a peal into his earsAs never subject did unto his king .
Content ; I 'll bear my part. -- Hollo ! who 's there ?
Guard .
Ay , marry , such a guard as this doth well .
Lead on the way .
Whither will your lordships ?
Whither else but to the king ?
His highness is dispos 'd to be alone .
Why , so he may ; but we will speak to him .
You may not in , my lord .
May we not ?
KING EDWARD and KENT .
How now ! What noise is this ? who have we here ? is't you ? [ Going .
Nay , stay , my lord ; I come to bring you news ; Mine uncle 's taken prisoner by the Scots .
Then ransom him .
'T was in your wars ; you should ransom him .
And you will ransom him , or else --
What , Mortimer , you will not threaten him ?
Quiet yourself ; you shall have the broad seal , To gather for him th [ o ] roughout the realm .
Your minion Gaveston hath taught you this .
My lord , the family of the MortimersAre not so poor , but , would they sell their land , 'Twould levy men enough to anger you.We never beg , but use such prayers as these .
Shall I still be haunted thus ?
Nay , now you are here alone , I 'll speak my mind .
And so will I ; and then , my lord , farewell .
The idle triumphs , masks , lascivious shows , And prodigal gifts bestow 'd on Gaveston , Have drawn thy treasury dry , and made thee weak ; The murmuring commons , overstretched , break .
Look for rebellion , look to be depos 'd : Thy garrisons are beaten out of France , And , lame and poor , lie groaning at the gates ; The wild Oneil , with swarms of Irish kerns , Lives uncontroll 'd within the English pale ; Unto the walls of York the Scots make road , And , unresisted , drive away rich spoils .
The haughty Dane commands the narrow seas , While in the harbour ride thy ships unrigg 'd .
What foreign prince sends thee ambassadors ?
Who loves thee , but a sort of flatterers ?
Thy gentle queen , sole sister to Valois , Complains that thou hast left her all forlorn .
Thy court is naked , being bereft of thoseThat make a king seem glorious to the world , I mean the peers , whom thou shouldst dearly love ; Libels are cast against thee in the street ; Ballads and rhymes made of thy overthrow .
The northern borderers , seeing their houses burnt , Their wives and children slain , run up and down , Cursing the name of thee and Gaveston .
When wert thou in the field with banner spread , But once ? and then thy soldiers march 'd like players , With garish robes , not armour ; and thyself , Bedaub 'd with gold , rode laughing at the rest , Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest , Where women 's favours hung like labels down .
And thereof came it that the fleering Scots , To England 's high disgrace , have made this jig ; Maids of England , sore may you mourn , For your lemans you have lost at Bannocksbourn , -- With a heave and a ho ! What weeneth the king of EnglandSo soon to have won Scotland ! -- With a rombelow !
Wigmore shall fly , to set my uncle free .
And , when 't is gone , our swords shall purchase more.If you be mov 'd , revenge it as you can : Look next to see us with our ensigns spread. [ Exit with Y. Mortimer .
My swelling heart for very anger breaks : How oft have I been baited by these peers , And dare not be reveng 'd , for their power is great ! Yet , shall the crowning of these cockerelsAffright a lion ? Edward , unfold thy paws , And let their lives'-blood slake thy fury 's hunger.If I be cruel and grow tyrannous , Now let them thank themselves , and rue too late .
My lord , I see your love to GavestonWill be the ruin of the realm and you , For now the wrathful nobles threaten wars ; And therefore , brother , banish him for ever .
Art thou an enemy to my Gaveston ?
Ay ; and it grieves me that I favour 'd him .
Traitor , be gone ! whine thou with Mortimer .
So will I , rather than with Gaveston .
Out of my sight , and trouble me no more !
No marvel though thou scorn thy noble peers , When I thy brother am rejected thus .
Away ! [ Exit Kent.Poor Gaveston , thou hast no friend but me ! Do what they can , we 'll live in Tynmouth here ; And , so I walk with him about the walls , What care I though the earls begirt us round ? Here comes she that is cause of all these jars .
QUEEN ISABELLA , with EDWARD 'S NIECE , two Ladies , GAVESTON , BALDOCK , and the younger SPENSER .
My lord , 't is thought the earls are up in arms .
Ay , and 't is likewise thought you favour 'em .
Thus do you still suspect me without cause .
Sweet uncle , speak more kindly to the queen .
My lord , dissemble with her ; speak her fair .
Pardon me , sweet ; I forgot myself .
Your pardon is quickly got of Isabel .
The younger Mortimer is grown so brave , That to my face he threatens civil wars .
Why do you not commit him to the Tower ?
I dare not , for the people love him well .
Why , then , we 'll have him privily made away .
Would Lancaster and he had both carous'dA bowl of poison to each other 's health ! But let them go , and tell me what are these .
Two of my father 's servants whilst he liv 'd : May't please your grace to entertain them now .
Tell me , where wast thou born ? what is thine arms ?
My name is Baldock , and my gentryI fetch from Oxford , not from heraldry .
The fitter art thou , Baldock , for my turn.Wait on me , and I 'll see thou shalt not want .
I humbly thank your majesty .
Knowest thou him , Gaveston .
Ay , my lord ; His name is Spenser ; he is well allied : For my sake let him wait upon your grace ; Scarce shall you find a man of more desert .
Then , Spenser , wait upon me for his sake : I 'll grace thee with a higher style ere long .
No greater titles happen unto meThan to be favour 'd of your majesty !
Cousin , this day shall be your marriage feast : -- And , Gaveston , think that I love thee well , To wed thee to our niece , the only heirUnto the Earl of Glocester late deceas 'd .
I know , my lord , many will stomach me ; But I respect neither their love nor hate .
The headstrong barons shall not limit me ; He that I list to favour shall be great.Come , let 's away ; and , when the marriage ends , Have at the rebels and their complices ! [ Exeunt .
KENT , LANCASTER , the younger MORTIMER , WARWICK , PEMBROKE , and others .
My lords , of love to this our native land , I come to join with you , and leave the king ; And in your quarrel , and the realm 's behoof , Will be the first that shall adventure life .
I fear me , you are sent of policy , To undermine us with a show of love .
He is your brother ; therefore have we causeTo cast the worst , and doubt of your revolt .
Mine honour shall be hostage of my truth : If that will not suffice , farewell , my lords .
Stay , Edmund : never was PlantagenetFalse of his word ; and therefore trust we thee .
But what 's the reason you should leave him now ?
I have inform 'd the Earl of Lancaster .
And it sufficeth. Now , my lords , know this , That Gaveston is secretly arriv 'd , And here in Tynmouth frolics with the king.Let us with these our followers scale the walls , And suddenly surprise them unawares .
I 'll give the onset .
And I 'll follow thee .
This tatter 'd ensign of my ancestors , Which swept the desert shore of that Dead SeaWhereof we got the name of Mortimer , Will I advance upon this castle [ 's ] walls -- Drums , strike alarum , raise them from their sport , And ring aloud the knell of Gaveston !
None be so hardy as to touch the king ; But neither spare you Gaveston nor his friends. [ Exeunt .
KING EDWARD and the younger
O , tell me , Spenser , where is Gaveston ?
I fear me he is slain , my gracious lord .
No , here he comes ; now let them spoil and kill .
QUEEN ISABELLA , KING EDWARD 'S Niece , GAVESTON , and Nobles.Fly , fly , my lords ; the earls have got the hold ; Take shipping , and away to Scarborough : Spenser and I will post away by land .
O , stay , my lord ! they will not injure you .
I will not trust them. Gaveston , away !
Farewell , my lord .
Lady , farewell .
Farewell , sweet uncle , till we meet again .
Farewell , sweet Gaveston ; and farewell , niece .
No farewell to poor Isabel thy queen ?
Yes , yes , for Mortimer your lover 's sake .
Heavens can witness , I love none but you. [ Exeunt all except Queen Isabella.From my embracements thus he breaks away.O , that mine arms could close this isle about , That I might pull him to me where I would ! Or that these tears , that drizzle from mine eyes , Had power to mollify his stony heart , That , when I had him , we might never part !
LANCASTER , WARWICK , the younger MORTIMER , andothers. Alarums within .
I wonder how he scap 'd .
Who 's this ? the queen !
Ay , Mortimer , the miserable queen , Whose pining heart her inward sighs have blasted , And body with continual mourning wasted : These hands are tir 'd with haling of my lordFrom Gaveston , from wicked Gaveston ; And all in vain ; for , when I speak him fair , He turns away , and smiles upon his minion .
Cease to lament , and tell us where 's the king ?
What would you with the king ? is't him you seek ?
No , madam , but that cursed Gaveston : Far be it from the thought of LancasterTo offer violence to his sovereign ! We would but rid the realm of Gaveston : Tell us where he remains , and he shall die .
He 's gone by water unto Scarborough : Pursue him quickly , and he can not scape ; The king hath left him , and his train is small .
Forslow no time , sweet Lancaster ; let 's march .
How comes it that the king and he is parted ?
That thus your army , going several ways , Might be of lesser force , and with the powerThat he intendeth presently to raise , Be easily suppress 'd : therefore be gone .
Here in the river rides a Flemish hoy : Let 's all aboard , and follow him amain .
The wind that bears him hence will fill our sails ; Come , come , aboard ! 't is but an hour 's sailing .
Madam , stay you within this castle here .
No , Mortimer ; I 'll to my lord the king .
Nay , rather sail with us to Scarborough .
You know the king is so suspiciousAs , if he hear I have but talk 'd with you , Mine honour will be call 'd in question ; And therefore , gentle Mortimer , be gone .
Madam , I can not stay to answer you : But think of Mortimer as he deserves. [ Exeunt all except Queen Isabella .
So well hast thou deserv 'd , sweet Mortimer , As Isabel could live with thee for ever.In vain I look for love at Edward 's hand , Whose eyes are fix 'd on none but Gaveston.Yet once more I 'll importune him with prayer : If he be strange , and not regard my words , My son and I will over into France , And to the king my brother there complainHow Gaveston hath robb 'd me of his love : But yet , I hope , my sorrows will have end , And Gaveston this blessed day be slain. [ Exit .
GAVESTON , pursued .
Yet , lusty lords , I have escap 'd your hands , Your threats , your 'larums , and your hot pursuits ; And , though divorced from King Edward 's eyes , Yet liveth Pierce of Gaveston unsurpris 'd , Breathing in hope ( malgrado all your beards , That muster rebels thus against your king ) To see his royal sovereign once again .
WARWICK , LANCASTER , PEMBROKE , the youngerMORTIMER , Soldiers , JAMES and other Attendants of
Upon him , soldiers ! take away his weapons !
Thou proud disturber of thy country 's peace , Corrupter of thy king , cause of these broils , Base flatterer , yield ! and , were it not for shame , Shame and dishonour to a soldier 's name , Upon my weapon 's point here shouldst thou fall , And welter in thy gore .
Monster of men , That , like the Greekish strumpet , train 'd to armsAnd bloody wars so many valiant knights , Look for no other fortune , wretch , than death ! King Edward is not here to buckler thee .
Lancaster , why talk'st thou to the slave ? -- Go , soldiers , take him hence ; for , by my sword , His head shall off. -- Gaveston , short warningShall serve thy turn : it is our country 's causeThat here severely we will executeUpon thy person. -- Hang him at a bough .
My lord , --
Soldiers , have him away. -- But , for thou wert the favourite of a king , Thou shalt have so much honour at our hands .
I thank you all , my lords : then I perceiveThat heading is one , and hanging is the other , And death is all .
ARUNDEL .
How now , my Lord of Arundel !
My lords , King Edward greets you all by me .
Arundel , say your message .
His majesty , hearing that you had taken Gaveston , Entreateth you by me , yet but he maySee him before he dies ; for why , he says , And sends you word , he knows that die he shall ; And , if you gratify his grace so far , He will be mindful of the courtesy .
How now !
Renowmed Edward , how thy nameRevives poor Gaveston !
No , it needeth not : Arundel , we will gratify the kingIn other matters ; he must pardon us in this. -- Soldiers , away with him !
Why , my Lord of Warwick , Will now these short delays beget my hopes ? I know it , lords , it is life you aim at , Yet grant King Edward this .
Shalt thou appointWhat we shall grant ? -- Soldiers , away with him ! -- Thus we 'll gratify the king ; We 'll send his head by thee ; let him bestowHis tears on that , for that is all he getsOf Gaveston , or else his senseless trunk .
Not so , my lord , lest he bestow more costIn burying him than he hath ever earn 'd .
My lords , it is his majesty 's request , And in the honour of a king he swears , He will but talk with him , and send him back .
When , can you tell ? Arundel , no ; we wotHe that the care of his realm remits , And drives his nobles to these exigentsFor Gaveston , will , if he seize him once , Violate any promise to possess him .
Then , if you will not trust his grace in keep , My lords , I will be pledge for his return .
'T is honourable in thee to offer this ; But , for we know thou art a noble gentleman , We will not wrong thee so , To make away a true man for a thief .
How mean'st thou , Mortimer ? that is over-base .
Away , base groom , robber of king 's renown ! Question with thy companions and mates .
My Lord Mortimer , and you , my lords , each one , To gratify the king 's request therein , Touching the sending of this Gaveston , Because his majesty so earnestlyDesires to see the man before his death , I will upon mine honour undertakeTo carry him , and bring him back again ; Provided this , that you , my Lord of Arundel , Will join with me .
Pembroke , what wilt thou do ? Cause yet more bloodshed ? is it not enoughThat we have taken him , but must we nowLeave him on `` Had I wist , '' and let him go ?
My lords , I will not over-woo your honours : But , if you dare trust Pembroke with the prisoner , Upon mine oath , I will return him back .
My Lord of Lancaster , what say you in this ?
Why , I say , let him go on Pembroke 's word .
And you , Lord Mortimer ?
How say you , my Lord of Warwick ?
Nay , do your pleasures : I know how 'twill prove .
Then give him me .
Sweet sovereign , yet I comeTo see thee ere I die !
Yet not perhaps , If Warwick 's wit and policy prevail. [ Aside .
My Lord of Pembroke , we deliver him you : Return him on your honour. -- Sound , away ! [ Exeunt all except Pembroke , Arundel , Gaveston , Jamesand other attendants of Pembroke .
My lord , you shall go with me : My house is not far hence ; out of the wayA little ; but our men shall go along.We that have pretty wenches to our wives , Sir , must not come so near to balk their lips .
'T is very kindly spoke , my Lord of Pembroke : Your honour hath an adamant of powerTo draw a prince .
So , my lord. -- Come hither , James : I do commit this Gaveston to thee ; Be thou this night his keeper ; in the morningWe will discharge thee of thy charge : be gone .
Unhappy Gaveston , whither go'st thou now ? [ Exit with James and other Attendants of Pembroke .
My lord , we 'll quickly be at Cobham. [ Exeunt .
GAVESTON mourning , JAMES and other Attendants
PEMBROKE .
O treacherous Warwick , thus to wrong thy friend !
I see it is your life these arms pursue .
Weaponless must I fall , and die in bands ? O , must this day be period of my life , Centre of all my bliss ? And ye be men , Speed to the king .
WARWICK and Soldiers .
My Lord of Pembroke 's men , Strive you no longer : I will have that Gaveston .
Your lordship doth dishonour to yourself , And wrong our lord , your honourable friend .
No , James , it is my country 's cause I follow. -- Go , take the villain : soldiers , come away ; We 'll make quick work. -- Commend me to your master , My friend , and tell him that I watch 'd it well. -- Come , let thy shadow parley with King Edward .
Treacherous earl , shall I not see the king ?
The king of heaven perhaps , no other king. -- Away ! [ Exeunt Warwick and Soldiers with Gaveston .
Come , fellows : it booted not for us to strive : We will in haste go certify our lord. [ Exeunt .
KING EDWARD , the younger SPENSER , BALDOCK , Noblemen
Soldiers with drums and fifes .
I long to hear an answer from the baronsTouching my friend , my dearest Gaveston.Ah , Spenser , not the riches of my realmCan ransom him ! ah , he is mark 'd to die ! I know the malice of the younger Mortimer ; Warwick I know is rough , and LancasterInexorable ; and I shall never seeMy lovely Pierce of Gaveston again : The barons overbear with me their pride .
Were I King Edward , England 's sovereign , Son to the lovely Eleanor of Spain , Great Edward Longshanks ' issue , would I bearThese braves , this rage , and suffer uncontroll'dThese barons thus to beard me in my land , In mine own realm ? My lord , pardon my speech : Did you retain your father 's magnanimity , Did you regard the honour of your name , You would not suffer thus your majestyBe counterbuff 'd of your nobility.Strike off their heads , and let them preach on poles : No doubt , such lessons they will teach the rest , As by their preachments they will profit much , And learn obedience to their lawful king .
Yes , gentle Spenser , we have been too mild , Too kind to them ; but now have drawn our sword , And , if they send me not my Gaveston , We 'll steel it on their crest [ s ] , and poll their tops .
This haught resolve becomes your majesty , Not to be tied to their affection , As though your highness were a school-boy still , And must be aw 'd and govern 'd like a child .
SPENSER with his truncheon , andSoldiers .
Long live my sovereign , the noble Edward , In peace triumphant , fortunate in wars !
Welcome , old man : com'st thou in Edward 's aid ? Then tell thy prince of whence and what thou art .
Low , with a band of bow-men and of pikes , Brown bills and targeteers , four hundred strong , Sworn to defend King Edward 's royal right , I come in person to your majesty , Spenser , the father of Hugh Spenser there , Bound to your highness everlastinglyFor favour done , in him , unto us all .
Thy father , Spenser ?
True , an it like your grace , That pours , in lieu of all your goodness shown , His life , my lord , before your princely feet .
Welcome ten thousand times , old man , again ! Spenser , this love , this kindness to thy king , Argues thy noble mind and disposition.Spenser , I here create thee Earl of Wiltshire , And daily will enrich thee with our favour , That , as the sunshine , shall reflect o'er thee.Beside , the more to manifest our love , Because we hear Lord Bruce doth sell his land , And that the Mortimers are in hand withal , Thou shalt have crowns of us t'outbid the barons ; And , Spenser , spare them not , lay it on. -- Soldiers , a largess , and thrice-welcome all !
My lord , here comes the queen .
QUEEN ISABELLA , PRINCE EDWARD , and
Madam , what news ?
News of dishonour , lord , and discontent.Our friend Levune , faithful and full of trust , Informeth us , by letters and by words , That Lord Valois our brother , King of France , Because your highness hath been slack in homage , Hath seized Normandy into his hands : These be the letters , this the messenger .
Welcome , Levune. -- Tush , Sib , if this be all , Valois and I will soon be friends again. -- But to my Gaveston : shall I never see , Never behold thee now ! -- Madam , in this matterWe will employ you and your little son ; You shall go parley with the King of France. -- Boy , see you bear you bravely to the king , And do your message with a majesty .
Commit not to my youth things of more weightThan fits a prince so young as I to bear ; And fear not , lord and father , -- heaven 's great beamsOn Atlas ' shoulder shall not lie more safeThan shall your charge committed to my trust .
Ah , boy , this towardness makes thy mother fearThou art not mark 'd to many days on earth !
Madam , we will that you with speed be shipp 'd , And this our son ; Levune shall follow youWith all the haste we can despatch him hence.Choose of our lords to bear you company ; And go in peace ; leave us in wars at home .
Unnatural wars , where subjects brave their king : God end them once ! -- My lord , I take my leave , To make my preparation for France. [ Exit with Prince Edward .
ARUNDEL .
What , Lord Arundel , dost thou come alone ?
Yea , my good lord , for Gaveston is dead .
Ah , traitors , have they put my friend to death ? Tell me , Arundel , died he ere thou cam'st , Or didst thou see my friend to take his death ?
Neither , my lord ; for , as he was surpris 'd , Begirt with weapons and with enemies round , I did your highness ' message to them all , Demanding him of them , entreating rather , And said , upon the honour of my name , That I would undertake to carry himUnto your highness , and to bring him back .
And , tell me , would the rebels deny me that ?
Proud recreants !
Yea , Spenser , traitors all !
In found them at the first inexorable ; The Earl of Warwick would not bide the hearing , Mortimer hardly ; Pembroke and LancasterSpake least ; and when they flatly had denied , Refusing to receive me pledge for him , The Earl of Pembroke mildly thus bespake ; '' My lord , because our sovereign sends for him , And promiseth he shall be safe return 'd , I will this undertake , to have him hence , And see him re-deliver 'd to your hands . ''
Well , and how fortunes [ it ] that he came not ?
Some treason or some villany was cause .
The Earl of Warwick seiz 'd him on his way ; For , being deliver 'd unto Pembroke 's men , Their lord rode home , thinking his prisoner safe ; But , ere he came , Warwick in ambush lay , And bare him to his death ; and in a trenchStrake off his head , and march 'd unto the camp .
A bloody part , flatly 'gainst law of arms !
O , shall I speak , or shall I sigh and die !
My lord , refer your vengeance to the swordUpon these barons ; hearten up your men ; Let them not unreveng 'd murder your friends : Advance your standard , Edward , in the field , And march to fire them from their starting-holes .
[ kneeling. ] By earth , the common mother of us all , By heaven , and all the moving orbs thereof , By this right hand , and by my father 's sword , And all the honours 'longing to my crown , I will have heads and lives for him as manyAs I have manors , castles , towns , and towers ! -- [ Rises.Treacherous Warwick ! traitorous Mortimer ! If I be England 's king , in lakes of goreYour headless trunks , your bodies will I trail , That you may drink your fill , and quaff in blood , And stain my royal standard with the same , That so my bloody colours may suggestRemembrance of revenge immortallyOn your accursed traitorous progeny , You villains that have slain my Gaveston ! -- And in this place of honour and of trust , Spenser , sweet Spenser , I adopt thee here ; And merely of our love we do create theeEarl of Glocester and Lord Chamberlain , Despite of times , despite of enemies .
My lord , here 's a messenger from the baronsDesires access unto your majesty .
Admit him near .
Herald with his coat of arms .
Long live King Edward , England 's lawful lord !
So wish not they , I wis , that sent thee hither : Thou com'st from Mortimer and his complices : A ranker rout of rebels never was.Well , say thy message .
The barons , up in arms , by me saluteYour highness with long life and happiness ; And bid me say , as plainer to your grace , That if without effusion of bloodYou will this grief have ease and remedy , That from your princely person you removeThis Spenser , as a putrifying branchThat deads the royal vine , whose golden leavesEmpale your princely head , your diadem ; Whose brightness such pernicious upstarts dim , Say they , and lovingly advise your graceTo cherish virtue and nobility , And have old servitors in high esteem , And shake off smooth dissembling flatterers : This granted , they , their honours , and their lives , Are to your highness vow 'd and consecrate .
Ah , traitors , will they still display their pride ?
Away ! tarry no answer , but be gone ! -- Rebels , will they appoint their sovereignHis sports , his pleasures , and his company ? -- Yet , ere thou go , see how I do divorce [ Embraces young Spenser.Spenser from thee. Now get thee to thy lords , And tell them I will come to chastise themFor murdering Gaveston : hie thee , get thee gone ! Edward , with fire and sword , follows at thy heels. [ Exit Herald.My lord [ s ] , perceive you how these rebels swell ? -- Soldiers , good hearts ! defend your sovereign 's right , For , now , even now , we march to make them stoop.Away ! [ Exeunt. Alarums , excursions , a great fight , and aretreat sounded , within .
KING EDWARD , the elder SPENSER , the youngerSPENSER , BALDOCK , and Noblemen of the king 's side .
Why do we sound retreat ? upon them , lords ! This day I shall your vengeance with my swordOn those proud rebels that are up in arms , And do confront and countermand their king .
I doubt it not , my lord ; right will prevail .
'T is not amiss , my liege , for either partTo breathe a while ; our men , with sweat and dustAll chok 'd well near , begin to faint for heat ; And this retire refresheth horse and man .
Here come the rebels .
MORTIMER , LANCASTER , WARWICK , PEMBROKE , and others .
Look , Lancaster , yonder is EdwardAmong his flatterers .
And there let him be , Till he pay dearly for their company .
And shall , or Warwick 's sword shall smite in vain .
What , rebels , do you shrink and sound retreat ?
No , Edward , no ; thy flatterers faint and fly .
They 'd best betimes forsake thee and their trains , For they 'll betray thee , traitors as they are .
Traitor on thy face , rebellious Lancaster !
Away , base upstart ! brav'st thou nobles thus ?
A noble attempt and honourable deed , Is it not , trow ye , to assemble aidAnd levy arms against your lawful king ?
For which , ere long , their heads shall satisfyT ' appease the wrath of their offended king .
Then , Edward , thou wilt fight it to the last , And rather bathe thy sword in subjects ' bloodThan banish that pernicious company ?
Ay , traitors all , rather than thus be brav 'd , Make England 's civil towns huge heaps of stones , And ploughs to go about our palace-gates .
A desperate and unnatural resolution ! -- Alarum to the fight ! Saint George for England , and the barons ' right !
Saint George for England , and King Edward 's right ! [ Alarums. Exeunt the two parties severally .
KING EDWARD and his followers , with the Barons
KENT captive .
Now , lusty lords , now not by chance of war , But justice of the quarrel and the cause , Vail 'd is your pride : methinks you hang the headsBut we 'll advance them , traitors : now 't is timeTo be aveng 'd on you for all your braves , And for the murder of my dearest friend , To whom right well you knew our soul was knit , Good Pierce of Gaveston , my sweet favourite : Ah , rebels , recreants , you made him away !
Brother , in regard of thee and of thy land , Did they remove that flatterer from thy throne .
So , sir , you have spoke : away , avoid our presence ! [ Exit Kent.Accursed wretches , was't in regard of us , When we had sent our messenger to requestHe might be spar 'd to come to speak with us , And Pembroke undertook for his return , That thou , proud Warwick , watch 'd the prisoner , Poor Pierce , and headed him 'gainst law of arms ? For which thy head shall overlook the restAs much as thou in rage outwent'st the rest .
Tyrant , I scorn thy threats and menaces ; It is but temporal that thou canst inflict .
The worst is death ; and better die to liveThan live in infamy under such a king .
Away with them , my lord of Winchester ! These lusty leaders , Warwick and Lancaster , I charge you roundly , off with both their heads ! Away !
Farewell , vain world !
Sweet Mortimer , farewell !
England , unkind to thy nobility , Groan for this grief ! behold how thou art maim 'd !
Go , take that haughty Mortimer to the Tower ; There see him safe bestow 'd ; and , for the rest , Do speedy execution on them all.Be gone !
What , Mortimer , can ragged stony wallsImmure thy virtue that aspires to heaven ? No , Edward , England 's scourge , it may not be ; Mortimer 's hope surmounts his fortune far. [ The captive Barons are led off .
Sound , drums and trumpets ! March with me , my friends.Edward this day hath crown 'd him king anew. [ Exeunt all except the younger Spenser , Levune and Baldock .
Levune , the trust that we repose in theeBegets the quiet of King Edward 's land : Therefore be gone in haste , and with adviceBestow that treasure on the lords of France , That , therewith all enchanted , like the guardThat suffer 'd Jove to pass in showers of goldTo Danaë , all aid may be deniedTo Isabel the queen , that now in FranceMakes friends , to cross the seas with her young son , And step into his father 's regiment .
That 's it these barons and the subtle queenLong levell 'd at .
Yea , but , Levune , thou seest , These barons lay their heads on blocks together : What they intend , the hangman frustrates clean .
Have you no doubt , my lords , I 'll clap so closeAmong the lords of France with England 's gold , That Isabel shall make her plaints in vain , And France shall be obdurate with her tears .
Then make for France amain ; Levune , away ! Proclaim King Edward 's wars and victories. [ Exeunt .
KENT .
Fair blows the wind for France : blow , gentle gale , Till Edmund be arriv 'd for England 's good ! Nature , yield to my country 's cause in this ! A brother ? no , a butcher of thy friends ! Proud Edward , dost thou banish me thy presence ? But I 'll to France , and cheer the wronged queen , And certify what Edward 's looseness is.Unnatural king , to slaughter noblemanAnd cherish flatterers ! Mortimer , I stayThy sweet escape. Stand gracious , gloomy night , To his device !
MORTIMER disguised .
Holla ! who walketh there ? Is't you , my lord ?
Mortimer , 't is I.But hath thy portion wrought so happily ?
It hath , my lord : the warders all asleep , I thank them , gave me leave to pass in peace.But hath your grace got shipping unto France ?
Fear it not. [ Exeunt .
QUEEN ISABELLA and PRINCE EDWARD .
Ah , boy , our friends do fail us all in France ! The lords are cruel , and the king unkind.What shall we do ?
Madam , return to England , And please my father well ; and then a figFor all my uncle 's friendship here in France ! I warrant you , I 'll win his highness quickly ; 'A loves me better than a thousand Spensers .
Ah , boy , thou art deceiv 'd , at least in this , To think that we can yet be tun 'd together ! No , no , we jar too far. -- Unkind Valois ! Unhappy Isabel , when France rejects , Whither , O , whither dost thou bend thy steps ?
SIR JOHN OF HAINAULT .
Madam , what cheer ?
Ah , good Sir John of Hainault , Never so cheerless nor so far distrest !
I hear , sweet lady , of the king 's unkindness : But droop not , madam ; noble minds contemnDespair. Will your grace with me to Hainault , And there stay time 's advantage with your son ? -- How say you , my lord ! will you go with your friends , And shake off all our fortunes equally ?
So pleaseth the queen my mother , me it likes : The king of England , not the court of France , Shall have me from my gracious mother 's side , Till I be strong enough to break a staff ; And then have at the proudest Spenser 's head !
Well said , my lord !
O my sweet heart , how do I moan thy wrongs , Yet triumph in the hope of thee , my joy ! -- Ah , sweet Sir John , even to the utmost vergeOf Europe , on the shore of Tanais , Will we with thee to Hainault -- so we will : The marquis is a noble gentleman ; His grace , I dare presume , will welcome me. -- But who are these ?
KENT and the younger MORTIMER .
Madam , long may you live , Much happier than your friends in England do !
Lord Edmund and Lord Mortimer alive ! Welcome to France ! the news was here , my lord , That you were dead , or very near your death .
Lady , the last was truest of the twain : But Mortimer , reserv 'd for better hap , Hath shaken off the thraldom of the Tower , And lives t ' advance your standard , good my lord .
How mean you , and the king my father lives ? No , my Lord Mortimer , not I , I trow .
Not , son ! Why not ? I would it were no worse ! -- But , gentle lords , friendless we are in France .
Monsieur Le Grand , a noble friend of yours , Told us , at our arrival , all the news , -- How hard the nobles , how unkind the kingHath show 'd himself : but , madam , right makes roomWhere weapons want ; and , though a many friendsAre made away , as Warwick , Lancaster , And others of our part and faction , Yet have we friends , assure your grace , in England , Would cast up caps , and clap their hands for joy , To see us there , appointed for our foes .
Would all were well , and Edward well reclaim 'd , For England 's honour , peace , and quietness !
But by the sword , my lord , 't must be deserv 'd : The king will ne'er forsake his flatterers .
My lords of England , sith th ' ungentle kingOf France refuseth to give aid of armsTo this distressed queen , his sister , here , Go you with her to Hainault : doubt ye notWe will find comfort , money , men , and friends , Ere long to bid the English king a base. -- How say'st , young prince , what think you of the match ?
I think King Edward will outrun us all .
Nay , son , not so ; and you must not discourageYour friends that are so forward in your aid .
Sir John of Hainault , pardon us , I pray : These comforts that you give our woful queenBind us in kindness all at your command .
Yea , gentle brother : -- and the God of heavenProsper your happy motion , good Sir John !
This noble gentleman , forward in arms , Was born , I see , to be our anchor-hold. -- Sir John of Hainault , be it thy renown , That England 's queen and nobles in distressHave been by thee restor 'd and comforted .
Madam , along ; and you , my lord [ s ] , with me , That England 's peers may Hainault 's welcome see. [ Exeunt .
KING EDWARD , ARUNDEL , the elder SPENSER , theyounger SPENSER , and others .
Thus , after many threats of wrathful war , Triumpheth England 's Edward with his friends , And triumph Edward with his friends uncontroll 'd ! -- My Lord of Glocester , do you hear the news ?
What news , my lord ?
Why , man , they say there is great executionDone through the realm. -- My Lord of Arundel , You have the note , have you not ?
From the Lieutenant of the Tower , my lord .
I pray , let us see it. [ Takes the note from Arundel. -- What have we there ? -- Read it , Spenser. [ Gives the note to young Spenser , who readstheir names.Why , so : they bark 'd apace a month ago ; Now , on my life , they 'll neither bark nor bite.Now , sirs , the news from France ? Glocester , I trow , The lords of France love England 's gold so wellAs Isabella gets no aid from thence.What now remains ? have you proclaim 'd , my lord , Reward for them can bring in Mortimer ?
My lord , we have ; and , if he be in England , 'A will be had ere long , I doubt it not .
If , dost thou say ? Spenser , as true as death , He is in England 's ground : our port-mastersAre not so careless of their king 's command .
Messenger.How now ! what news with thee ? from whence come these ?
Letters , my lord , and tidings forth of France : To you , my Lord of Glocester , from Levune. [ Gives letters to young Spenser .
Read .
[ reading. ] My duty to your honour promised , etc. , Ihave , according to instructions in that behalf , dealt with theKing of France and his lords , and effected that the queen , alldiscontented and discomforted , is gone : whither , if you ask , with Sir John of Hainault , brother to the marquis , intoFlanders. With them are gone Lord Edmund and the LordMortimer , having in their company divers of your nation , and others ; and , as constant report goeth , they intend togive King Edward battle in England , sooner than he canlook for them. This is all the news of import.Your honour 's in all service , Levune .
Ah , villains , hath that Mortimer escap 'd ? With him is Edmund gone associate ? And will Sir John of Hainault lead the round ? Welcome , o ' God 's name , madam , and your son ! England shall welcome you and all your rout.Gallop apace , bright Phbus , through the sky ; And , dusky Night , in rusty iron car , Between you both shorten the time , I pray , That I may see that most desired day , When we may meet these traitors in the field ! Ah , nothing grieves me , but my little boyIs thus misled to countenance their ills ! Come , friends , to Bristow , there to make us strong : And , winds , as equal be to bring them in , As you injurious were to bear them forth ! [ Exeunt .
QUEEN ISABELLA , PRINCE EDWARD , KENT , theyounger MORTIMER , and SIR JOHN OF HAINAULT .
Now , lords , our loving friends and countrymen , Welcome to England all , with prosperous winds ! Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left , To cope with friends at home ; a heavy caseWhen force to force is knit , and sword and glaiveIn civil broils make kin and countrymenSlaughter themselves in others , and their sidesWith their own weapons gor 'd ! But what 's the help ? Misgovern 'd kings are cause of all this wreck ; And , Edward , thou art one among them all , Whose looseness hath betray 'd thy land to spoil , Who made the channel overflow with bloodOf thine own people : patron shouldst thou be ; But thou --
Nay , madam , if you be a warrior , You must not grow so passionate in speeches. -- Lords , sith that we are , by sufferance of heaven , Arriv 'd and armed in this prince 's right , Here for our country 's cause swear we to himAll homage , fealty , and forwardness ; And for the open wrongs and injuriesEdward hath done to us , his queen , and land , We come in arms to wreck it with the sword ; That England 's queen in peace may repossessHer dignities and honours ; and withalWe may remove these flatterers from the kingThat havock England 's wealth and treasury .
Sound trumpets , my lord , and forward let us march.Edward will think we come to flatter him .
I would he never had been flatter 'd more ! [ Exeunt .
KING EDWARD , BALDOCK , and the younger SPENSER .
Fly , fly , my lord ! the queen is overstrong ; Her friends do multiply , and yours do fail.Shape we our course to Ireland , there to breathe .
What , was I born to fly and run away , And leave the Mortimers conquerors behind ? Give me my horse , and let 's reinforce our troops.And in this bed of honour die with fame .
O , no , my lord ! this princely resolutionFits not the time : away ! we are pursu'd. [ Exeunt .
KENT , with a sword and target .
This way he fled ; but I am come too late.Edward , alas , my heart relents for thee ! Proud traitor , Mortimer , why dost thou chaseThy lawful king , thy sovereign , with thy sword ? Vile wretch , and why hast thou , of all unkind , Borne arms against thy brother and thy king ? Rain showers of vengeance on my cursed head , Thou God , to whom in justice it belongsTo punish this unnatural revolt ! Edward , this Mortimer aims at thy life : O , fly him , then ! But , Edmund , calm this rage ; Dissemble , or thou diest ; for MortimerAnd Isabel do kiss , while they conspire : And yet she bears a face of love , forsooth : Fie on that love that hatcheth death and hate ! Edmund , away ! Bristow to Longshanks ' bloodIs false ; be not found single for suspect : Proud Mortimer pries near into thy walks .
QUEEN ISABELLA , PRINCE EDWARD , the youngerMORTIMER , and SIR JOHN JOHN OF HAINAULT .
Successful battle gives the God of kingsTo them that fight in right , and fear in wrath , Since , then , successfully we have prevail 'd , Thanked be heaven 's great architect , and you ! Ere farther we proceed , my noble lords , We here create our well-beloved son , Of love and care unto his royal person , Lord Warden of the realm ; and , sith the FatesHave made his father so infortunate , Deal you , my lords , in this , my loving lords , As to your wisdoms fittest seems in all .
Madam , without offence if I may askHow will you deal with Edward in his fall ?
Tell me , good uncle , what Edward do you mean ?
Nephew , your father ; I dare not call him king .
My Lord of Kent , what needs these questions ? 'T is not in her controlment nor in ours ; But as the realm and parliament shall please , So shall your brother be disposed of. -- I like not this relenting mood in Edmund : Madam , 't is good to look to him betimes. [ Aside to the Queen .
My lord , the Mayor of Bristow knows our mind .
Yea , madam ; and they scape not easilyThat fled the field .
Baldock is with the king : A goodly chancellor , is he not , my lord ?
So are the Spensers , the father and the son .
This Edward is the ruin of the realm .
RICE AP HOWEL with the elder SPENSER prisoner , and Attendants .
God save Queen Isabel and her princely son ! Madam , the Mayor and citizens of Bristow , In sign of love and duty to this presence , Present by me this traitor to the state , Spenser , the father to that wanton Spenser , That , like the lawless Catiline of Rome , Revell 'd in England 's wealth and treasury .
We thank you all .
Your loving care in thisDeserveth princely favours and rewards.But where 's the king and the other Spenser fled ?
Spenser the son , created Earl of Glocester , Is with that smooth-tongu 'd scholar Baldock gone , And shipp 'd but late for Ireland with the king .
Some whirlwind fetch them back , or sink them all ! -- [ Aside.They shall be started thence , I doubt it not .
Shall I not see the king my father yet ?
Unhappy Edward , chas 'd from England 's bounds ! [ Aside .
Madam , what resteth ? why stand you in a muse ?
I rue my lord 's ill-fortune : but , alas , Care of my country call 'd me to this war !
Madam , have done with care and sad complaint : Your king hath wrong 'd your country and himself , And we must seek to right it as we may. -- Meanwhile have hence this rebel to the block .
Rebel is he that fights against the prince : So fought not they that fought in Edward 's right .
Take him away ; he prates. [ Exeunt Attendants with the elder Spenser.You , Rice ap Howel , Shall do good service to her majesty , Being of countenance in your country here , To follow these rebellious runagates. -- We in mean while , madam , must take advice.How Baldock , Spenser , and their complices , May in their fall be follow 'd to their end. [ Exeunt .
Abbot , Monks , KING EDWARD , the youngerSPENSER , and BALDOCK ( the three latter disguised ) .
Have you no doubt , my lord ; have you no fear : As silent and as careful we will beTo keep your royal person safe with us , Free from suspect , and fell invasionOf such as have your majesty in chase , Yourself , and those your chosen company , As danger of this stormy time requires .
Father , thy face should harbour no deceit.O , hadst thou ever been a king , thy heart , Pierc 'd deeply with sense of my distress , Could not but take compassion of my state ! Stately and proud in riches and in train , Whilom I was , powerful and full of pomp : But what is he whom rule and emperyHave not in life or death made miserable ? -- Come , Spenser , -- come , Baldock , -- come , sit down by me ; Make trial now of that philosophyThat in our famous nurseries of artsThou suck'dst from Plato and from Aristotle. -- Father , this life contemplative is heaven : O , that I might this life in quiet lead ! But we , alas , are chas 'd ! -- and you , my friends , Your lives and my dishonour they pursue. -- Yet , gentle monks , for treasure , gold , nor fee , Do you betray us and our company .
Your grace may sit secure , if none but weDo wot of your abode .
Not one alive : but shrewdly I suspectA gloomy fellow in a mead below ; 'A gave a long look after us , my lord ; And all the land , I know , is up in arms , Arms that pursue our lives with deadly hate .
We were embark 'd for Ireland ; wretched we , With awkward winds and with sore tempests driven , To fall on shore , and here to pine in fearOf Mortimer and his confederates !
Mortimer ! who talks of Mortimer ? Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer , That bloody man ? -- Good father , on thy lapLay I this head , laden with mickle care.O , might I never ope these eyes again , Never again lift up this drooping head , O , never more lift up this dying heart !
Look up , my lord. -- Baldock , this drowsinessBetides no good ; here even we are betray 'd .
RICE AP HOWEL , a Mower,
LEICESTER .
Upon my life , these be the men ye seek .
Fellow , enough. -- My lord , I pray , be short ; A fair commission warrants what we do .
The queen 's commission , urg 'd by Mortimer : What can not gallant Mortimer with the queen ? -- Alas , see where he sits , and hopes unseenT'escape their hands that seek to reave his life ! Too true it is , Quem dies vidit veniens superbum , Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.But , Leicester , leave to grow so passionate. -- Spenser and Baldock , by no other names , I arrest you of high treason here.Stand not on titles , but obey th ' arrest : 'T is in the name of Isabel the queen. -- My lord , why droop you thus ?
O day , the last of all my bliss on earth ! Centre of all misfortune ! O my stars , Why do you lour unkindly on a king ? Comes Leicester , then , in Isabella 's name , To take my life , my company from me ? Here , man , rip up this panting breast of mine , And take my heart in rescue of my friends .
Away with them !
It may become thee yetTo let us take our farewell of his grace .
My heart with pity earns to see this sight ; A king to bear these words and proud commands ! [ Aside .
Spenser , ah , sweet Spenser , thus , then , must we part ?
We must , my lord ; so will the angry heavens .
Nay , so will hell and cruel Mortimer : The gentle heavens have not to do in this .
My lord , it is in vain to grieve or storm.Here humbly of your grace we take our leaves : Our lots are cast ; I fear me , so is thine .
In heaven we may , in earth ne'er shall we meet : -- And , Leicester , say , what shall become of us ?
Your majesty must go to Killingworth .
Must ! it is somewhat hard when kings must go .
Here is a litter ready for your grace , That waits your pleasure , and the day grows old .
As good be gone , as stay and be benighted .
A litter hast thou ? lay me in a hearse , And to the gates of hell convey me hence ; Let Pluto 's bells ring out my fatal knell , And hags howl for my death at Charon 's shore ; For friends hath Edward none but these , And these must die under a tyrant 's sword .
My lord , be going : care not for these ; For we shall see them shorter by the heads .
Well , that shall be shall be : part we must ; Sweet Spenser , gentle Baldock , part we must. -- Hence , feigned weeds ! unfeigned are my woes. -- [ Throwing off his disguise.Father , farewell. -- Leicester , thou stay'st for me ; And go I must. -- Life , farewell , with my friends ! [ Exeunt King Edward and Leicester .
O , is he gone ? is noble Edward gone ? Parted from hence , never to see us more ! Rend , sphere of heaven ! and , fire , forsake thy orb ! Earth , melt to air ! gone is my sovereign , Gone , gone , alas , never to make return !
Spenser , I see our souls are fleeting hence ; We are depriv 'd the sunshine of our life.Make for a new life , man ; throw up thy eyesAnd heart and hand to heaven 's immortal throne ; Pay nature 's debt with cheerful countenance ; Reduce we all our lessons unto this , -- To die , sweet Spenser , therefore live we all ; Spenser , all live to die , and rise to fall .
Come , come , keep these preachments till you come tothe place appointed. You , and such as you are , havemade wise work in England. Will your lordships away ?
Your lordship I trust will remember me ?
Remember thee , fellow ! what else ? Follow me tothe town. [ Exeunt .
KING EDWARD , LEICESTER , the BISHOP OFWINCHESTER , and TRUSSEL .
Be patient , good my lord , cease to lament ; Imagine Killingworth Castle were your court , And that you lay for pleasure here a space , Not of compulsion or necessity .
Your grace mistakes ; it is for England 's good , And princely Edward 's right , we crave the crown .
No , 't is for Mortimer , not Edward 's headFor he 's a lamb , emcompassed by wolves , Which in a moment will abridge his life.But , if proud Mortimer do wear this crown , Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchless fire ! Or , like the snaky wreath of Tisiphon , Engirt the temples of his hateful head ! So shall not England 's vine be perished , But Edward 's name survive , though Edward dies .
My lord , why waste you thus the time away ? They stay your answer : will you yield your crown ?
My , lord , the parliament must have present news ; And therefore say , will you resign or no ? [ The king rageth .
I 'll not resign , but , whilst I live , [ be king ] .Traitors , be gone , and join you with Mortimer.Elect , conspire , install , do what you will : Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries .
This answer we 'll return ; and so , farewell. [ Going with Trussel .
Call them again , my lord , and speak them fair ; For , if they go , the prince shall lose his right .
Call thou them back ; I have no power to speak .
My lord , the king is willing to resign .
If he be not , let him choose .
O , would I might ! but heavens and earth conspireTo make me miserable. Here , receive my crown.Receive it ? no , these innocent hands of mineShall not be guilty of so foul a crime ; He of you all that most desires my blood , And will be call 'd the murderer of a king , Take it. What , are you mov 'd ? pity you me ? Then send for unrelenting Mortimer , And Isabel , whose eyes being turn 'd to steelWill sooner sparkle fire than shed a tear.Yet stay ; for , rather than I 'll look on them , Here , here ! [ Gives the crown. ] -- Now , sweet God of heaven , Make me despise this transitory pomp , And sit fot aye enthronised in heaven ! Come , death , and with thy fingers close my eyes , Or , if I live , let me forget myself !
My lord , --
Call me not lord ; away , out of my sight ! Ah , pardon me ! grief makes me lunatic.Let not that Mortimer protect my son ; More safety there is in a tiger 's jawsThan his embracements. Bear this to the queen , Wet with my tears , and dried again with sighs : [ Gives a handkerchief.If with the sight thereof she be not mov 'd , Return it back , and dip it in my blood.Commend me to my son , and bid him ruleBetter than I : yet how have I transgress 'd , Unless it be with too much clemency ?
And thus , most humbly do we take our leave .
Farewell. [ Exeunt the Bishop of Winchester and Trussel with thecrown.I know the next news that they bringWill be my death ; and welcome shall it be : To wretched men death is felicity .
Another post ! what news brings he ?
BERKELEY , who gives a paper to LEICESTER .
Such news as I expect. -- Come , Berkeley , come , And tell thy message to my naked breast .
My lord , think not a thought so villanousCan harbour in a man of noble birth.To do your highness service and devoir , And save you from your foes , Berkeley would die .
My lord , the council of the queen commandThat I resign my charge .
And who must keep me now ? Must you , my lord ?
Ay , my most gracious lord ; so 't is decreed .
[ Taking the paper. ] By Mortimer , whose name is written here ! Well may I rent his name that rends my heart. [ Tears it.This poor revenge hath something eas 'd my mind : So may his limbs be torn as is this paper ! Hear me , immortal Jove , and grant it too !
Your grace must hence with me to Berkeley straight .
Whither you will : all places are alike , And every earth is fit for burial .
Favour him , my lord , as much as lieth in you .
Even so betide my soul as I use him !
Mine enemy hath pitied my estate , And that 's the cause that I am now remov 'd .
And thinks your grace that Berkeley will be cruel ?
I know not ; but of this am I assur 'd , That death ends all , and I can die but once. -- Leicester , farewell .
Not yet , my lord ; I 'll bear you on your way. [ Exeunt .
QUEEN ISABELLA and the younger MORTIMER .
Fair Isabel , now have we our desire ; The proud corrupters of the light-brain 'd kingHave done their homage to the lofty gallows , And he himself lies in captivity.Be rul 'd by me , and we will rule the realm : In any case take heed of childish fear , For now we hold an old wolf by the ears , That , if he slip , will seize upon us both , And gripe the sorer , being grip 'd himself.Think therefore , madam , that imports us muchTo erect your son with all the speed we may , And that I be protector over him : For our behoof , 'twill bear the greater swayWhenas a king 's name shall be under-writ .
Sweet Mortimer , the life of Isabel , Be thou persuaded that I love thee well ; And therefore , so the prince my son be safe , Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes , Conclude against his father what thou wilt , And I myself will willingly subscribe .
First would I hear news he were depos 'd , And then let me alone to handle him .
Messenger.Letters ! from whence ?
From Killingworth , my lord ?
How fares my lord the king ?
In health , madam , but full of pensiveness .
Alas , poor soul , would I could ease his grief !
BISHOP OF WINCHESTER with the crown.Thanks , gentle Winchester. -- Sirrah , be gone. [ Exit Messenger .
The king hath willingly resign 'd his crown .
O , happy news ! send for the prince my son .
Further , or this letter was seal 'd , Lord Berkeley came , So that he now is gone from Killingworth ; And we have heard that Edmund laid a plotTo set his brother free ; nor more but so.The Lord of Berkeley is so pitifulAs Leicester that had charge of him before .
Then let some other be his guardian .
Let me alone ; here is the privy-seal , -- [ Exit the Bish. of Win.Who 's there ? Call hither , Gurney and Matrevis. -- [ To Attendants within.To dash the heavy-headed Edmund 's drift , Berkeley shall be discharg 'd , the king remov 'd , And none but we shall know where he lieth .
But , Mortimer , as long as he survives , What safety rests for us or for my son ?
Speak , shall he presently be despatch 'd and die ?
I would he were , so 'twere not by my means !
MATREVIS and GURNEY .
Enough. -- Matrevis , write a letter presentlyUnto the Lord of Berkeley from ourself , That he resign the king to thee and Gurney ; And , when 't is done , we will subscribe our name .
It shall be done , my lord. [ Writes .
Gurney , --
My lord ?
As thou intend'st to rise by Mortimer , Who now makes Fortune 's wheel turn as he please , Seek all the means thou canst to make him droop , And neither give him kind word nor good look .
I warrant you , my lord .
And this above the rest : because we hearThat Edmund casts to work his liberty , Remove him still from place to place by night , Till at the last he come to Killingworth , And then from thence to Berkeley back again ; And by the way , to make him fret the more , Speak curstly to him ; and in any caseLet no man comfort him , if he chance to weep , But amplify his grief with bitter words .
Fear not , my lord ; we 'll do as you command .
So , now away ! post thitherwards amain .
Whither goes this letter ? to my lord the king ? Commend me humbly to his majesty , And tell him that I labour all in vainTo ease his grief and work his liberty ; And bear him this as witness of my love. [ Gives ring .
I will , madam. [ Exit with Gurney .
Finely dissembled ! do so still , sweet queen.Here comes the young prince with the Earl of Kent .
Something he whispers in his childish ears .
If he have such access unto the prince , Our plots and stratagems will soon be dash 'd .
Use Edmund friendly , as if all were well .
PRINCE EDWARD , and KENT talking with him .
How fares my honourable Lord of Kent ?
In health , sweet Mortimer. -- How fares your grace ?
Well , if my lord your brother were enlarg 'd .
I hear of late he hath depos 'd himself .
The more my grief .
And mine .
Ah , they do dissemble ! [ Aside .
Sweet son , come hither ; I must talk with thee .
You , being his uncle and the next of blood , Do look to be protector o'er the prince .
Not I , my lord : who should protect the son , But she that gave him life ? I mean the queen .
Mother , persuade me not to wear the crown : Let him be king ; I am too young to reign .
But be content , seeing 't is his highness ' pleasure .
Let me but see him first , and then I will .
Ay , do , sweet nephew .
Brother , you know it is impossible .
Why , is he dead ?
No , God forbid !
I would those words proceeded from your heart !
Inconstant Edmund , dost thou favour him , That wast a cause of his imprisonment ?
The more cause now have I to make amends .
[ aside to Q. ISAB. ] I tell thee , 't is not meet that one so falseShould come about the person of a prince. -- My lord , he hath betray 'd the king his brother , And therefore trust him not .
But he repents , and sorrows for it now .
Come , son , and go with this gentle lord and me .
With you I will , but not with Mortimer .
Why , youngling , 'sdain'st thou so of Mortimer ? Then I will carry thee by force away .
Help , uncle Kent ! Mortimer will wrong me .
Brother Edmund , strive not ; we are his friends ; Isabel is nearer than the Earl of Kent .
Sister , Edward is my charge ; redeem him .
Edward is my son , and I will keep him .
Mortimer shall know that he hath wronged me.Hence will I haste to Killingworth Castle , And rescue aged Edward from his foes , To be reveng 'd on Mortimer and thee. [ Aside. [ Exeunt , on the one side , Queen Isabella , Prince Edwardand the younger Mortimer ; on other other , Kent .
MATREVIS , GURNEY , and Soldiers , withKING EDWARD .
My lord , be not pensive ; we are your friends : Men are ordain 'd to live in misery ; Therefore , come ; dalliance dangereth our lives .
Friends , whither must unhappy Edward go ? Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest ? Must I be vexed like the nightly bird , Whose sight is loathsome to all winged fowls ? When will the fury of his mind assuage ? When will his heart be satisfied with blood ? If mine will serve , unbowel straight this breast , And give my heart to Isabel and him : It is the chiefest mark they level at .
Not so , my liege : the queen hath given this charge , To keep your grace in safety : Your passions make your dolours to increase .
This usage makes my misery increase.But can my air of life continue long , When all my senses are annoy 'd with stench ? Within a dungeon England 's king is kept , Where I am starv 'd for want of sustenance ; My daily diet is heart-breaking sobs , That almost rent the closet of my heart : Thus lives old Edward not reliev 'd by any , And so must die , though pitied by many.O , water , gentle friends , to cool my thirst , And clear my body from foul excrements !
Here 's channel-water , as our charge is given : Sit down , for we 'll be barbers to your grace .
Traitors , away ! what , will you murder me , Of choke your sovereign with puddle-water ?
No , but wash your face , and shave away your beard , Lest you be known , and so be rescued .
Why strive you thus ? your labour is in vain .
The wren may strive against the lion 's strength , But all in vain : so vainly do I striveTo seek for mercy at a tyrant 's hand. [ They wash him with puddle-water , and shave his beardaway.Immortal powers , that know the painful caresThat wait upon my poor distressed soul , O , level all your looks upon these daring menThat wrong their liege and sovereign , England 's king ! O Gaveston , it is for thee that I am wrong 'd ! For me both thou and both the Spensers died ; And for your sakes a thousand wrongs I 'll take.The Spensers ' ghosts , wherever they remain , Wish well to mine ; then , tush , for them I 'll die .
'Twixt theirs and yours shall be no enmity.Come , come , away ! Now put the torches out : We 'll enter in by darkness to Killingworth .
How now ! who comes there ?
KENT .
Guard the king sure : it is the Earl of Kent .
O gentle brother , help to rescue me !
Keep them asunder ; thrust in the king .
Soldiers , let me but talk to him one word .
Lay hands upon the earl for his assault .
Lay down your weapons , traitors ! yield the king !
Edmund , yield thou thyself , or thou shalt die .
Base villains , wherefore do you gripe me thus ?
Bind him , and so convey him to the court .
Where is the court but here ? here is the kingAnd I will visit him : why stay you me ?
The court is where Lord Mortimer remains : Thither shall your honour go ; and so , farewell. [ Exeunt Matrevis and Gurney with King Edward .
O , miserable is that common-weal , Where lords keep courts , and kings are lock 'd in prison !
Wherefore stay we ? on , sirs , to the court !
Ay , lead me whither you will , even to my death , Seeing that my brother can not be releas'd. [ Exeunt .
MORTIMER .
The king must die , or Mortimer goes down ; The commons now begin to pity him : Yet he that is the cause of Edward 's death , Is sure to pay for it when his son 's of age ; And therefore will I do it cunningly.This letter , written by a friend of ours , Contains his death , yet bids then save his life ; [ Reads.Edwardum occidere nolite timere , bonum est , Fear not to kill the king , 't is good he die : But read it thus , and that 's another sense ; Edwardum occidere nolite , timere bonum est , Kill not the king , 't is good to fear the worst.Unpointed as it is , thus shall it go.That , being dead , if it chance to be found , Matrevis and the rest may bear the blame , And we be quit that caus 'd it to be done.Within this room is lock 'd the messengerThat shall convey it , and perform the rest ; And , by a secret token that he bears , Shall he be murder 'd when the deed is done. -- Lightborn , come forth !
LIGHTBORN.Art thou so resolute as thou wast ?
What else , my lord ? and far more resolute .
And hast thou cast how to accomplish it ?
Ay , ay ; and none shall know which way he died .
But at his looks , Lightborn , thou wilt relent .
Relent ! ha , ha ! I use much to relent .
Well , do it bravely , and be secret .
You shall not need to give instructions ; 'T is not the first time I have kill 'd a man : I learn 'd in Naples how to poison flowers ; To strangle with a lawn thrust down the throat ; To pierce the wind pipe with a needle 's point ; Or , whilst one is asleep , to take a quill , And blow a little powder in his ears ; Or open his mouth , and pour quick-silver down.But yet I have a braver way than these .
What 's that ?
Nay , you shall pardon me ; none shall know my tricks .
I care not how it is , so it be not spied.Deliver this to Gurney and Matrevis : [ Gives letter.At every ten-mile end thou hast a horse : Take this [ Gives money ] : away , and never see me more !
No ?
No ; unless thou bring me news of Edward 's death .
That will I quickly do. Farewell , my lord. [ Exit .
The prince I rule , the queen do I command , And with a lowly congé to the groundThe proudest lords salute me as I pass ; I seal , I cancel , I do what I will.Fear 'd am I more than lov 'd ; -- let me be fear 'd , And , when I frown , make all the court look pale.I view the prince with Aristarchus ' eyes , Whose looks were as a breeching to a boy.They thrust upon me the protectorship , And sue to me for that that I desire ; While at the council-table , grave enough , And not unlike a bashful puritan , First I complain of imbecility , Saying it is onus quam gravissimum ; Till , being interrupted by my friends,
that provinciam , as they term it ; And , to conclude , I am Protector now.Now all is sure : the queen and MortimerShall rule the realm , the king ; and none rule us.Mine enemies will I plague , my friends advance ; And what I list command who dare control ?
And that this be the coronation-day , It pleaseth me and Isabel the queen. [ Trumpets within.The trumpets sound ; I must go take my place .
KING EDWARD THE THIRD , QUEEN ISABELLA , theARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY , Champion , and Nobles .
Long live King Edward , by the grace of GodKing of England and Lord of Ireland !
If any Christian , Heathen , Turk , or Jew , Dares but affirm that Edward 's not true king , And will avouch his saying with the sword , I am the Champion that will combat him .
None comes : sound , trumpets ! [ Trumpets .
Champion , here 's to thee. [ Gives purse .
Lord Mortimer , now take him to your charge .
Soldiers with KENT prisoner .
What traitor have we there with blades and bills ?
Edmund the Earl of Kent .
What hath he done ?
'A would have taken the king away perforce , As we were bringing him to Killingworth .
Did you attempt his rescue , Edmund ? speak .
Mortimer , I did : he is our king , And thou compell'st this prince to wear the crown .
Strike off his head : he shall have martial law .
Strike off my head ! base traitor , I defy thee !
My lord , he is my uncle , and shall live .
My lord , he is your enemy , and shall die .
Stay , villains !
Sweet mother , if I can not pardon him , Entreat my Lord Protector for his life .
Son , be content : I dare not speak a word .
Nor I ; and yet methinks I should command : But , seeing I can not , I 'll entreat for him. -- My lord , if you will let my uncle live , I will requite it when I come to age .
'T is for your highness ' good and for the realm's. -- How often shall I bid you bear him hence ?
Art thou king ? must I die at thy command ?
At our command. -- Once more , away with him !
Let me but stay and speak ; I will not go : Either my brother or his son is king , And none of both them thirst for Edmund 's blood : And therefore , soldiers , whither will you hale me ? [ Soldiers hale Kent away , and carry him to be beheaded .
What safety may I look for at his hands , If that my uncle shall be murder 'd thus ?
Fear not , sweet boy ; I 'll guard thee from thy foes : Had Edmund liv 'd , he would have sought thy death.Come , son , we 'll ride a-hunting in the park .
And shall my uncle Edmund ride with us ?
He is a traitor ; think not on him : come. [ Exeunt .
MATREVIS and GURNEY .
Gurney , I wonder the king dies not , Being in a vault up to the knees in water , To which the channels of the castle run , From whence a damp continually ariseth , That were enough to poison any man , Much more a king , brought up so tenderly .
And so do I , Matrevis : yesternightI open 'd but the door to throw him meat , And I was almost stifled with the savour .
He hath a body able to endureMore than we can inflict : and therefore nowLet us assail his mind another while .
Send for him out thence , and I will anger him .
But stay ; who 's this ?
LIGHTBORN .
My Lord Protector greets you. [ Gives letter .
What 's there ? I know not how to construe it .
Gurney , it was left unpointed for the nonce ;
That 's his meaning .
Know you this token ? I must have the king. [ Gives token .
Ay , stay a while ; thou shalt have answer straight. -- This villain 's sent to make away the king .
I thought as much .
And , when the murder 's done , See how he must be handled for his labour , --
Let him have the king ; What else ? -- Here is the keys , this is the lake : Do as you are commanded by my lord .
I know what I must do. Get you away : Yet be not far off ; I shall need your help : See that in the next room I have a fire , And get me a spit , and let it be red-hot .
Very well .
Need you anything besides ?
What else ? a table and a feather-bed .
That 's all ?
Ay , ay : so , when I call you , bring it in .
Fear not thou that .
Here 's a light to go into the dungeon. [ Gives light to Lightborn , and then exit with Matrevis .
So , now.Must I about this gear : ne'er was there anySo finely handled as this king shall be. -- Foh , here 's a place indeed with all my heart !
Who 's there ? what light is that ? wherefore com'st thou ?
To comfort you , and bring you joyful news .
Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks : Villain , I know thou com'st to murder me .
To murder you , my most gracious lord ? Far is it from my heart to do you harm.The queen sent me to see how you were us 'd , For she relents at this your misery : And what eye can refrain from shedding tears , To see a king in this most piteous state ?
Weep'st thou already ? list a while to me , And then thy heart , were it as Gurney 's is , Or as Matrevis ' , hewn from the Caucasus , Yet will it melt ere I have done my tale.This dungeon where they keep me is the sinkWherein the filth of all the castle falls .
O villains !
And there , in mire and puddle , have I stoodThis ten days ' space ; and , lest that I should sleep , One plays continually upon a drum ; They give me bread and water , being a king ; So that , for want of sleep and sustenance , My mind 's distemper 'd , and my body 's numb 'd , And whether I have limbs or no I know not.O , would my blood dropp 'd out from every vein , As doth this water from my tatter 'd robes ! Tell Isabel the queen , I look 'd not thus , When for her sake I ran at tilt in France , And there unhors 'd the Duke of Cleremont .
O , speak no more , my lord ! this breaks my heart.Lie on this bed , and rest yourself a while .
These looks of thine can harbour naught but death ; I see my tragedy written in thy brows.Yet stay a while ; forbear thy bloody hand , And let me see the stroke before it comes , That even then when I shall lose my life , My mind may be more steadfast on my God .
What means your highness to mistrust me thus ?
What mean'st thou to dissemble with me thus ?
These hands were never stain 'd with innocent blood , Nor shall they now be tainted with a king 's .
Forgive my thought for having such a thought.One jewel have I left ; receive thou this : [ Gives jewel.Still fear I , and I know not what 's the cause , But every joint shakes as I give it thee.O , if thou harbour'st murder in thy heart , Let this gift change thy mind , and save thy soul ! Know that I am a king : O , at that nameI feel a hell of grief ! where is my crown ? Gone , gone ! and do I [ still ] remain alive ?
You 're overwatch 'd , my lord : lie down and rest .
But that grief keeps me waking , I should sleep ; For not these ten days have these eye-lids clos'd.Now , as I speak , they fall ; and yet with fearOpen again. O , wherefore sitt'st thou here ?
If you mistrust me , I 'll be gone , my lord .
No , no ; for , if thou mean'st to murder me , Thou wilt return again ; and therefore stay. [ Sleeps .
He sleeps .
[ waking ] O , let me not die yet ! O , stay a while !
How now , my lord !
Something still buzzeth in mine ears , And tells me , if I sleep , I never wake : This fear is that which makes me tremble thus ; And therefore tell me , wherefore art thou come ?
To rid thee of thy life. -- Matrevis , come !
MATREVIS and GURNEY .
I am too weak and feeble to resist. -- Assist me , sweet God , and receive my soul !
Run for the table .
O , spare me , or despatch me in a trice ! [ Matrevis brings in a table. King Edward is murderedby holding him down on the bed with the table , andstamping on it .
So , lay the table down , and stamp on it , But not too hard , lest that you bruise his body .
I fear me that this cry will raise the town , And therefore let us take horse and away .
Tell me , sirs , was it not bravely done ?
Excellent well : take this for thy reward. [ Stabs Lightborn , who dies.Come , let us cast the body in the moat , And bear the king 's to Mortimer our lord : Away ! [ Exeunt with the bodies .
MORTIMER and MATREVIS .
Is't done , Matrevis , and the murderer dead ?
Ay , my good lord : I would it were undone !
Matrevis , if thou now grow'st penitent , I 'll be thy ghostly father ; therefore choose , Whether thou wilt be secret in this , Or else die by the hand of Mortimer .
Gurney , my lord , is fled , and will , I fear , Betray us both ; therefore let me fly .
Fly to the savages !
I humbly thank your honour. [ Exit .
As for myself , I stand as Jove 's huge tree , And others are but shrubs compar 'd to me : All tremble at my name , and I fear none : Let 's see who dare impeach me for his death !
QUEEN ISABELLA .
Ah , Mortimer , the king my son hath news , His father 's dead , and we have murder 'd him !
What if he have ? the king is yet a child .
Ay , but he tears his hair , and wrings his hands , And vows to be reveng 'd upon us both.Into the council-chamber he is gone , To crave the aid and succour of his peers.Ay me , see where he comes , and they with him ! Now , Mortimer , begins our tragedy .
KING EDWARD THE THIRD , Lords , and Attendants .
Fear not , my lord ; know that you are a king .
Villain ! --
Ho , now , my lord !
Think not that I am frighted with thy words : My father 's murder 'd through thy treachery ; And thou shalt die , and on his mournful hearseThy hateful and accursed head shall lie , To witness to the world that by thy meansHis kingly body was too soon interr 'd .
Weep not , sweet son .
Forbid not me to weep ; he was my father ; And had you lov 'd him half so well as I , You could not bear his death thus patiently : But you , I fear , conspir 'd with Mortimer .
Why speak you not unto my lord the king ?
Because I think scorn to be accus'd.Who is the man dares say I murder 'd him ?
Traitor , in me my loving father speaks , And plainly saith , 't was thou that murder'dst him .
But hath your grace no other proof than this ?
Yes , if this be the hand of Mortimer. [ Showing letter .
False Gurney hath betray 'd me and himself. [ Aside to Queen Isabella .
I fear 'd as much : murder can not be hid .
It is my hand ; what gather you by this ?
That thither thou didst send a murderer .
What murderer ? bring forth the man I sent .
Ah , Mortimer , thou know'st that he is slain ! And so shalt thou be too. -- Why stays he here ? Bring him unto a hurdle , drag him forth ; Hang him , I say , and set his quarters up : And bring his head back presently to me .
For my sake , sweet son , pity Mortimer !
Madam , entreat not : I will rather dieThan sue for life unto a paltry boy .
Hence with the traitor , with the murderer !
Base Fortune , now I see , that in thy wheelThere is a point , to which when men aspire , They tumble headlong down : that point I touch 'd , And , seeing there was no place to mount up higher , Why should I grieve at my declining fall ? -- Farewell , fair queen : weep not for Mortimer , That scorns the world , and , as a traveller , Goes to discover countries yet unknown .
What , suffer you the traitor to delay ? [ Exit the younger Mortimer with First Lord andsome of the Attendants .
As thou receivest thy life from me , Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer !
This argues that you spilt my father 's blood , Else would you not entreat for Mortimer .
I spill his blood ! no .
Ay , madam , you ; for so the rumour runs .
That rumour is untrue : for loving thee , Is this report rais 'd on poor Isabel .
I do not think her so unnatural .
My lord , I fear me it will prove too true .
Mother , you are suspected for his deathAnd therefore we commit you to the Tower , Till further trial may be made thereof.If you be guilty , though I be your son , Think not to find me slack or pitiful .
Nay , to my death ; for too long have I liv 'd , Whenas my son thinks to abridge my days .
Away with her ! her words enforce these tears , And I shall pity her , if she speak again .
Shall I not mourn for my beloved lord ? And with the rest accompany him to his grave .
Thus , madam , 't is the king 's will you shall hence .
He hath forgotten me : stay ; I am his mother .
That boots not ; therefore , gentle madam , go .
Then come , sweet death , and rid me of this grief ! [ Exit with Second Lord and some of the Attendants .
First Lord , with the head of the younger
My lord , here is the head of Mortimer .
Go fetch my father 's hearse , where it shall lie ; And bring my funeral robes. [ Exeunt Attendants.Accursed head , Could I have rul 'd thee then , as I do now , Thou hadst not hatch 'd this monstrous treachery ! -- Here comes the hearse : help me to mourn , my lords .
Attendants , with the hearse and funeral robes.Sweet father , here unto thy murder 'd ghostI offer up the wicked traitor 's head ; And let these tears , distilling from mine eyes , Be witness of my grief and innocency. [ Exeunt.End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Edward II. , by Christopher Marlowe*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EDWARD II. ******** This file should be named 20288-8.txt or 20288-8.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hero and Leander and Other Poems , byChristopher Marlowe and George ChapmanThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Release Date : January 14 , 2007 [ EBook # 20356 ]
Multa abiit virtus. Pro tot virtutibus uni , Livor , parce viro ; non audacissimus estoIllius in cineres , cujus tot millia vultusMortalium attonuit : sic cum te nuntia DitisVulneret exsanguis , feliciter ossa quiescant , Famaque marmorei superet monumenta sepulcri.DIALOGUE IN VERSEFirst printed in The Alleyn Papers ( for the Shakespeare Society ) , p. 8 , by Payne Collier , who prefaced it with the following remarks : '' In the original MS. this dramatic dialogue in verse is written asprose , on one side of a sheet of paper , at the back of which , in a moremodern hand , is the name 'Kitt Marlowe. ' What connection , if any , he may have had with it , it is impossible to determine. '' This Dialoguemay be a fragment of The Maiden 's Holiday , a lost comedy , which issaid to have been written partly by Marlowe. -- DYCE
Seest thou not yon farmer 's son ? He hath stoln my love from me , alas ! What shall I do ? I am undone ; My heart will ne'er be as it was.O , but he gives her gay gold rings , And tufted gloves [ for ] holiday , And many other goodly things , That hath stoln my love away .
Let him give her gay gold ringsOr tufted gloves , were they ne'er so [ gay ] ; [ F ] or were her lovers lords or kings , They should not carry the wench away .
But 'a dances wonders well , And with his dances stole her love from me : Yet she wont to say , I bore the bellFor dancing and for courtesy .
Fie , lusty younker , what do you here , Not dancing on the green to-day ? For Pierce , the farmer 's son , I fear , Is like to carry your wench away .
Good Dick , bid them all come hither , And tell Pierce from me beside , That , if he thinks to have the wench , Here he stands shall lie with the bride .
Fie , Nan , why use thy old lover so , For any other new-come guest ? Thou long time his love did know ; Why shouldst thou not use him best ?
Bonny Dick , I will not forsakeMy bonny Rowland for any gold : If he can dance as well as Pierce , He shall have my heart in hold .
Why , then , my hearts , let 's to this gear ; And by dancing I may wonMy Nan , whose love I hold so dearAs any realm under the sun .
Then , gentles , ere I speed from hence , I will be so bold to danceA turn or two without offence ; For , as I was walking along by chance , I was told you did agree .
'T is true , good sir ; and this is sheHopes your worship comes not to crave her ; For she hath lovers two or three , And he that dances best must have her .
How say you , sweet , will you dance with me ? And you [ shall ] have both land and [ hill ] ; My love shall want nor gold nor fee .
I thank you , sir , for your good will ; But one of these my love must be : I 'm but a homely country maid , And far unfit for your degree ; [ To dance with you I am afraid . ]
Take her , good sir , by the hand , As she is fairest : were she fairer , By this dance , you shall understand , He that can win her is like to wear her .
And saw you not [ my ] Nan to-day , My mother 's maid have you not seen ? My pretty Nan is gone awayTo seek her love upon the green. [ I can not see her 'mong so many : ] She shall have me , if she have any .
Welcome , sweetheart , and welcome here , Welcome , my [ true ] love , now to me.This is my love [ and my darling dear ] , And that my husband [ soon ] must be.And , boy , when thou com'st home , thou'lt seeThou art as welcome home as he .
Why , how now , sweet Nan ! I hope you jest .
No , by my troth , I love the fool the best : And , if you be jealous , God give you good-night ! I fear you 're a gelding , you caper so light .
I thought she had jested and meant but a fable , But now do I see she hath play [ 'd ] with his bable.I wish all my friends by me to take heed , That a fool come not near you when you mean to speed.THE ENDEnd of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hero and Leander and Other Poems , byChristopher Marlowe and George Chapman*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERO AND LEANDER AND OTHER POEMS ******** This file should be named 20356-8.txt or 20356-8.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dr. Faustus , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Posting Date : August 2 , 2008 [ EBook # 811 ] Release Date : February , 1997
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. FAUSTUS ***Produced by Gary R. L. YoungTHE TRAGICAL HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUSBy Christopher MarloweFrom The Quarto Of 1616.Edited By The Rev. Alexander Dyce.Comments on the preparation of the E-Text : SQUARE BRACKETS : The square brackets , i.e. are copied from the printed book , without change , except that the stage directions usually do nothave closing brackets. These have been added .
For this E-Text version of the book , the footnotes have beenconsolidated at the end of the play.Numbering of the footnotes has been changed , and each footnoteis given a unique identity.CHANGES TO THE TEXT : Character names were expanded. For Example , FAUSTUS was FAUST ; SECOND SCHOLAR was SEC. SCHOL.OTHER COMMENTS : This E-Text of Doctor Faustus is taken from a volume of
DUKE OF VANHOLT.MARTINO , |FREDERICK , | gentlemen.BENVOLIO , |
VALDES , | friends to FAUSTUS.CORNELIUS , |WAGNER , servant to FAUSTUS.Clown .
Vintner.Horse-courser.Carter.An Old Man.Scholars , Cardinals , ARCHBISHOP OF RHEIMS , Bishops , Monks , Friars , Soldiers , and Attendants.DUCHESS OF VANHOLT.Hostess .
Good Angel.Evil Angel.The Seven Deadly Sins.Devils.Spirits in the shapes of ALEXANDER THE GREAT , of his Paramour , of DARIUS , and of HELEN.Chorus.THE TRAGICAL HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUSFROM THE QUARTO OF 1616.Enter CHORUS .
I will , sir. [ Exit . ]
Their conference will be a greater help to meThan all my labours , plod I ne'er so fast.Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.GOOD ANGEL. O , Faustus , lay that damned book aside , And gaze not on it , lest it tempt thy soul , And heap God 's heavy wrath upon thy head ! Read , read the Scriptures : -- that is blasphemy.EVIL ANGEL. Go forward , Faustus , in that famous artWherein all Nature 's treasure is contain 'd : Be thou on earth as Jove is in the sky , Lord and commander of these [ 12 ] elements. [ Exeunt ANGELS . ]
Faustus , these books , thy wit , and our experience , Shall make all nations to [ 18 ] canonize us.As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords , So shall the spirits of every elementBe always serviceable to us three ; Like lions shall they guard us when we please ; Like Almain rutters with their horsemen 's staves , Or Lapland giants , trotting by our sides ; Sometimes like women , or unwedded maids , Shadowing more beauty in their airy browsThan have [ 19 ] the white breasts of the queen of love : From Venice shall they [ 20 ] drag huge [ 21 ] argosies , And from America the golden fleeceThat yearly stuffs [ 22 ] old Philip 's treasury ; If learned Faustus will be resolute .
Valdes , as resolute am I in thisAs thou to live : therefore object it not .
The miracles that magic will performWill make thee vow to study nothing else.He that is grounded in astrology , Enrich 'd with tongues , well seen in minerals , Hath all the principles magic doth require : Then doubt not , Faustus , but to be renowm 'd , [ 23 ] And more frequented for this mysteryThan heretofore the Delphian oracle.The spirits tell me they can dry the sea , And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks , Yea , all the wealth that our forefathers hidWithin the massy entrails of the earth : Then tell me , Faustus , what shall we three want ?
Nothing , Cornelius. O , this cheers my soul ! Come , shew me some demonstrations magical , That I may conjure in some bushy grove , And have these joys in full possession .
Then haste thee to some solitary grove , And bear wise Bacon 's and Albertus ' [ 24 ] works , The Hebrew Psalter , and New Testament ; And whatsoever else is requisiteWe will inform thee ere our conference cease .
Valdes , first let him know the words of art ; And then , all other ceremonies learn 'd , Faustus may try his cunning by himself .
First I 'll instruct thee in the rudiments , And then wilt thou be perfecter than I .
Then come and dine with me , and , after meat , We 'll canvass every quiddity thereof ; For , ere I sleep , I 'll try what I can do : This night I 'll conjure , though I die therefore. [ Exeunt. ] Enter two SCHOLARS.FIRST SCHOLAR. I wonder what 's become of Faustus , that was wontto make our schools ring with sic probo.SECOND SCHOLAR. That shall we presently know ; here comes his boy.Enter WAGNER.FIRST SCHOLAR. How now , sirrah ! where 's thy master ?
God in heaven knows.SECOND SCHOLAR. Why , dost not thou know , then ?
Yes , I know ; but that follows not.FIRST SCHOLAR. Go to , sirrah ! leave your jesting , and tell uswhere he is .
That follows not by force of argument , which you , beinglicentiates , should stand upon : therefore acknowledge yourerror , and be attentive.SECOND SCHOLAR. Then you will not tell us ?
Now , Faustus , what wouldst thou have me do ?
I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live , To do whatever Faustus shall command , Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere , Or the ocean to overwhelm the world .
I am a servant to great Lucifer , And may not follow thee without his leave : No more than he commands must we perform .
Did not he charge thee to appear to me ?
No , I came hither [ 32 ] of mine own accord .
Did not my conjuring speeches [ 33 ] raise thee ? speak !
That was the cause , but yet per accidens ; [ 34 ] For , when we hear one rack the name of God , Abjure the Scriptures and his Saviour Christ , We fly , in hope to get his glorious soul ; Nor will we come , unless he use such meansWhereby he is in danger to be damn'd.Therefore the shortest cut for conjuringIs stoutly to abjure all godliness , And pray devoutly to the prince of hell .
So Faustus hathAlready done ; and holds this principle , There is no chief but only Belzebub ; To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.This word `` damnation '' terrifies not me , For I confound hell in Elysium : My ghost be with the old philosophers ! But , leaving these vain trifles of men 's souls , Tell me what is that Lucifer thy lord ?
Arch-regent and commander of all spirits .
Was not that Lucifer an angel once ?
Yes , Faustus , and most dearly lov 'd of God .
How comes it , then , that he is prince of devils ?
O , by aspiring pride and insolence ; For which God threw him from the face of heaven .
And what are you that live with Lucifer ?
Unhappy spirits that fell [ 35 ] with Lucifer , Conspir 'd against our God with Lucifer , And are for ever damn 'd with Lucifer .
Where are you damn 'd ?
In hell .
How comes it , then , that thou art out of hell ?
Why , this is hell , nor am I out of it : Think'st thou that I , that saw the face of God , And tasted the eternal joys of heaven , Am not tormented with ten thousand hells , In being depriv 'd of everlasting bliss ? O , Faustus , leave these frivolous demands , Which strike [ 36 ] a terror to my fainting soul !
What , is great Mephistophilis so passionateFor being deprived of the joys of heaven ? Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude , And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.Go bear these tidings to great Lucifer : Seeing Faustus hath incurr 'd eternal deathBy desperate thoughts against Jove 's deity , Say , he surrenders up to him his soul , So he will spare him four and twenty years , Letting him live in all voluptuousness ; Having thee ever to attend on me , To give me whatsoever I shall ask , To tell me whatsoever I demand , To slay mine enemies , and to aid my friends , And always be obedient to my will.Go , and return to mighty Lucifer , And meet me in my study at midnight , And then resolve me of thy master 's mind .
I will , Faustus. [ Exit . ]
Had I as many souls as there be stars , I 'd give them all for Mephistophilis.By him I 'll be great emperor of the world , And make a bridge thorough [ 37 ] the moving air , To pass the ocean with a band of men ; I 'll join the hills that bind the Afric shore , And make that country continent to Spain , And both contributary to my crown : The Emperor shall not live but by my leave , Nor any potentate of Germany.Now that I have obtain 'd what I desir 'd , I 'll live in speculation of this art , Till Mephistophilis return again. [ Exit. ] Enter WAGNER and CLOWN .
Come hither , sirrah boy .
Boy ! O , disgrace to my person ! zounds , boy in your face ! You have seen many boys with beards , I am sure .
Sirrah , [ 38 ] hast thou no comings in ?
Yes , and goings out too , you may see , sir .
Alas , poor slave ! see how poverty jests in his nakedness ! I know the villain 's out of service , and so hungry , that I knowhe would give his soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton , though it were blood-raw .
Not so neither : I had need to have it well roasted , andgood sauce to it , if I pay so dear , I can tell you .
Sirrah , wilt thou be my man , and wait on me , and I willmake thee go like Qui mihi discipulus ?
What , in verse ?
No , slave ; in beaten silk and staves-acre .
Staves-acre ! that 's good to kill vermin : then , belike , if I serve you , I shall be lousy .
Why , so thou shalt be , whether thou dost it or no ; for , sirrah , if thou dost not presently bind thyself to me for sevenyears , I 'll turn all the lice about thee into familiars , and makethem tear thee in pieces .
Nay , sir , you may save [ 39 ] yourself a labour , for theyare as familiar with me as if they paid for their meat and drink , I can tell you .
Well , sirrah , leave your jesting , and take these guilders. [ Gives money . ]
Yes , marry , sir ; and I thank you too .
So , now thou art to be at an hour 's warning , whensoeverand wheresoever the devil shall fetch thee .
Here , take your guilders again ; [ 40 ] I 'll none of 'em .
Not I ; thou art pressed : prepare thyself , or [ 41 ] I willpresently raise up two devils to carry thee away. -- Banio ! Belcher !
Belcher ! an Belcher come here , I 'll belch him : I am notafraid of a devil.Enter two DEVILS .
How now , sir ! will you serve me now ?
Ay , good Wagner ; take away the devil [ s ] , then .
Spirits , away ! [ Exeunt DEVILS. ] Now , sirrah , follow me .
I will , sir : but hark you , master ; will you teach me thisconjuring occupation ?
Ay , sirrah , I 'll teach thee to turn thyself to a dog , or a cat , or a mouse , or a rat , or any thing .
A dog , or a cat , or a mouse , or a rat ! O , brave , Wagner !
Villain , call me Master Wagner , and see that you walkattentively , and let your right eye be always diametrally fixedupon my left heel , that thou mayst quasi vestigiis nostris [ 42 ] insistere .
Well , sir , I warrant you. [ Exeunt. ] FAUSTUS discovered in his study .
Now , Faustus , Must thou needs be damn 'd , canst thou not be sav'd.What boots it , then , to think on God or heaven ? Away with such vain fancies , and despair ; Despair in God , and trust in Belzebub : Now , go not backward , [ 43 ] Faustus ; be resolute : Why [ 44 ] waver'st thou ? O , something soundeth in mine ear , '' Abjure this magic , turn to God again ! '' Why , he loves thee not ; The god thou serv'st is thine own appetite , Wherein is fix 'd the love of Belzebub : To him I 'll build an altar and a church , And offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.EVIL ANGEL. Go forward , Faustus , in that famous [ 45 ] art.GOOD ANGEL. Sweet Faustus , leave that execrable art .
Contrition , prayer , repentance -- what of [ 46 ] these ? GOOD ANGEL. O , they are means to bring thee unto heaven ! EVIL ANGEL. Rather illusions , fruits of lunacy , That make men [ 47 ] foolish that do use them most.GOOD ANGEL. Sweet Faustus , think of heaven and heavenly things.EVIL ANGEL. No , Faustus ; think of honour and of wealth. [ Exeunt ANGELS . ]
Wealth ! Why , the signiory of Embden shall be mine.When Mephistophilis shall stand by me , What power can hurt me ? Faustus , thou art safe : Cast no more doubts. -- Mephistophilis , come , And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer ; -- Is't not midnight ? -- come Mephistophilis , And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer ; -- Is't not midnight ? -- come Mephistophilis , Veni , veni , Mephistophile ! [ 48 ] Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.Now tell me what saith Lucifer , thy lord ?
That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he lives , So he will buy my service with his soul .
Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee .
But now thou must bequeath it solemnly , And write a deed of gift with thine own blood ; For that security craves Lucifer.If thou deny it , I must back to hell .
Stay , Mephistophilis , and tell me , what good will mysoul do thy lord ?
Enlarge his kingdom .
Is that the reason why he tempts us thus ?
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris .
Why , have you any pain that torture others ?
As great as have the human souls of men.But , tell me , Faustus , shall I have thy soul ? And I will be thy slave , and wait on thee , And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask .
Ay , Mephistophilis , I 'll give it thee. [ 49 ]
Then , Faustus , stab thine [ 50 ] arm courageously , And bind thy soul , that at some certain dayGreat Lucifer may claim it as his own ; And [ 51 ] then be thou as great as Lucifer .
[ Stabbing his arm ] Lo , Mephistophilis , for love of thee , Faustus hath cut his arm , and with his proper bloodAssures his soul to be great Lucifer 's , Chief lord and regent of perpetual night ! View here this blood that trickles from mine arm , And let it be propitious for my [ 52 ] wish .
But , Faustus , Write it in manner of a deed of gift .
[ Writing ] Ay , so I do. But , Mephistophilis , My blood congeals , and I can write no more .
I 'll fetch thee fire to dissolve it straight. [ Exit . ]
What might the staying of my blood portend ? Is it [ 53 ] unwilling I should write this bill ? Why streams it not , that I may write afresh ? FAUSTUS GIVES TO THEE HIS SOUL : O , there it stay 'd ! Why shouldst thou not ? is not thy soul thine own ? Then write again , FAUSTUS GIVES TO THEE HIS SOUL. [ 54 ] Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with the chafer of fire .
See , Faustus , here is fire ; set it on .
So , now the blood begins to clear again ; Now will I make an [ 55 ] end immediately. [ Writes . ]
What will not I do to obtain his soul ? [ Aside . ]
Consummatum est ; this bill is ended , And Faustus hath bequeath 'd his soul to Lucifer.But what is this inscription on mine arm ? Homo , fuge : whither should [ 56 ] I fly ? If unto God , [ 57 ] he 'll throw me down to hell.My senses are deceiv 'd ; here 's nothing writ : -- O , yes , I see it plain ; even here is writ , Homo , fuge : yet shall not Faustus fly .
I 'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind. [ Aside , and then exit. ] Enter DEVILS , giving crowns and rich apparel to FAUSTUS.They dance , and then depart.Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS .
What means this show ? speak , Mephistophilis .
Nothing , Faustus , but to delight thy mind , And let thee see what magic can perform .
But may I raise such spirits when I please ?
Ay , Faustus , and do greater things than these .
Then , Mephistophilis , receive this scroll , [ 58 ] A deed of gift of body and of soul : But yet conditionally that thou performAll covenants and articles between us both !
Faustus , I swear by hell and LuciferTo effect all promises between us both !
Then hear me read it , Mephistophilis. [ Reads. ] ON THESE CONDITIONS FOLLOWING. FIRST , THAT FAUSTUS MAY BE ASPIRIT IN FORM AND SUBSTANCE. SECONDLY , THAT MEPHISTOPHILISSHALL BE HIS SERVANT , AND BE BY HIM COMMANDED. THIRDLY , THATMEPHISTOPHILIS SHALL DO FOR HIM , AND BRING HIM WHATSOEVER HE
[ 59 ] FOURTHLY , THAT HE SHALL BE IN HIS CHAMBER OR HOUSE
LASTLY , THAT HE SHALL APPEAR TO THE SAID JOHN FAUSTUS , AT ALL TIMES , IN WHAT SHAPE AND FORM SOEVER HE PLEASE. I , JOHNFAUSTUS , OF WITTENBERG , DOCTOR , BY THESE PRESENTS , DO GIVE BOTHBODY AND SOUL TO LUCIFER PRINCE OF THE EAST , AND HIS MINISTERMEPHISTOPHILIS ; AND FURTHERMORE GRANT UNTO THEM , THAT , FOUR-AND-TWENTY YEARS BEING EXPIRED , AND THESE ARTICLES ABOVE-WRITTENBEING INVIOLATE , FULL POWER TO FETCH OR CARRY THE SAID JOHN FAUSTUS , BODY AND SOUL , FLESH AND [ 60 ] BLOOD , INTO THEIR HABITATION WHERESOEVER.BY ME , JOHN FAUSTUS .
Speak , Faustus , do you deliver this as your deed ?
Ay , take it , and the devil give thee good of it !
So , now , Faustus , ask me what thou wilt .
First I will question with [ 61 ] thee about hell.Tell me , where is the [ 62 ] place that men call hell ?
Under the heavens .
Ay , so are all things else ; but whereabouts ?
Within the bowels of these elements , Where we are tortur 'd and remain for ever : Hell hath no limits , nor is circumscrib'dIn one self-place ; but where we are is hell , And where hell is , there must we ever be : And , to be short , when all the world dissolves , And every creature shall be purified , All places shall be hell that are [ 63 ] not heaven .
I think hell 's a fable. [ 64 ]
Ay , think so still , till experience change thy mind .
Why , dost thou think that Faustus shall be damn 'd ?
Ay , of necessity , for here 's the scrollIn which thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer .
Ay , and body too ; and what of that ? Think'st thou that Faustus is so fond to imagineThat , after this life , there is any pain ? No , these are trifles and mere old wives ' tales .
But I am an instance to prove the contrary , For I tell thee I am damn 'd and now in hell .
Nay , an this be hell , I 'll willingly be damn 'd : What ! sleeping , eating , walking , and disputing ! But , leaving this , let me have a wife , The fairest maid in Germany ; For I am wanton and lascivious , And can not live without a wife .
Well , Faustus , thou shalt have a wife. [ MEPHISTOPHILIS fetches in a WOMAN-DEVIL . ]
What sight is this ?
Now , Faustus , wilt thou have a wife ?
Here 's a hot whore , indeed : no , I 'll no wife .
Marriage is but a ceremonial toy , And , if thou lov'st me , think no more of it.I 'll cull thee out the fairest courtezans , And bring them every morning to thy bed : She whom thine [ 65 ] eye shall like , thy [ 66 ] heart shall have , Were she as chaste as was [ 67 ] Penelope , As wise as Saba , or as beautifulAs was bright Lucifer before his fall.Here , take this book , peruse it well : The iterating of these lines brings gold ; The framing of this circle on the groundBrings thunder , whirlwinds , storm , and lightning ; Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself , And men in harness [ 68 ] shall appear to thee , Ready to execute what thou command'st .
Thanks , Mephistophilis , for this sweet book : This will I keep as chary as my life. [ Exeunt. ] Enter FAUSTUS , in his study , and MEPHISTOPHILIS .
When I behold the heavens , [ 69 ] then I repent , And curse thee , wicked Mephistophilis , Because thou hast depriv 'd me of those joys .
'T was thine [ 70 ] own seeking , Faustus ; thank thyself.But , think'st thou heaven is [ 71 ] such a glorious thing ? I tell thee , Faustus , it is not half so fairAs thou , or any man that breathes [ 72 ] on earth .
How prov'st thou that ?
'T was made for man ; then he 's more excellent .
If heaven was made for man , 't was made for me : I will renounce this magic and repent.Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.GOOD ANGEL. Faustus , repent ; yet God will pity thee.EVIL ANGEL. Thou art a spirit ; God can not pity thee .
Who buzzeth in mine ears [ 73 ] I am a spirit ? Be I a devil , yet God may pity me ; Yea , God will pity me , if I repent.EVIL ANGEL. Ay , but Faustus never shall repent. [ Exeunt ANGELS . ]
My heart is harden 'd , I can not repent ; Scarce can I name salvation , faith , or heaven : Swords , poisons , halters , and envenom 'd steelAre laid before me to despatch myself ; And long ere this I [ 74 ] should have done the deed , Had not sweet pleasure conquer 'd deep despair.Have not I made blind Homer sing to meOf Alexander 's love and Oenon 's death ? And hath not he , that built the walls of ThebesWith ravishing sound of his melodious harp , Made music with my Mephistophilis ? Why should I die , then , or basely despair ? I am resolv 'd ; Faustus shall not repent. -- Come , Mephistophilis , let us dispute again , And reason of divine astrology.Speak , are there many spheres above the moon ? Are all celestial bodies but one globe , As is the substance of this centric earth ?
As are the elements , such are the heavens , Even from the moon unto th ' empyreal orb , Mutually folded in each other 's spheres , And jointly move upon one axletree , Whose termine [ 75 ] is term 'd the world 's wide pole ; Nor are the names of Saturn , Mars , or JupiterFeign 'd , but are erring [ 76 ] stars .
But have they all one motion , both situ et tempore ?
All move from east to west in four-and-twentyhours upon the poles of the world ; but differ in their motionsupon the poles of the zodiac .
These slender questions Wagner can decide : Hath Mephistophilis no greater skill ? Who knows not the double motion [ 77 ] of the planets ? That the first is finish 'd in a natural day ; The second thus ; Saturn in thirty years ; Jupiter in twelve ; Mars in four ; the Sun , Venus , and Mercury in a year ; the Moonin twenty-eight days. These are freshmen 's questions. Buttell me , hath every sphere a dominion or intelligentia ?
Ay .
How many heavens or spheres are there ?
Nine ; the seven planets , the firmament , and the empyrealheaven .
But is there not coelum igneum et crystallinum ?
No , Faustus , they be but fables .
Resolve me , then , in this one question ; why are notconjunctions , oppositions , aspects , eclipses , all at one time , but in some years we have more , in some less ?
Per inoequalem motum respectu totius .
Well , I am answered. Now tell me who made the world ?
I will not .
Sweet Mephistophilis , tell me .
Move me not , Faustus .
Villain , have I not bound thee to tell me any thing ?
Ay , [ 78 ] that is not against our kingdom ; this is.Thou art damned ; think thou of hell .
Think , Faustus , upon God that made the world .
Remember this. [ Exit . ]
Ay , go , accursed spirit , to ugly hell ! 'T is thou hast damn 'd distressed Faustus ' soul.Is't not too late ? Re-enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.EVIL ANGEL. Too late.GOOD ANGEL. Never too late , if Faustus will repent.EVIL ANGEL. If thou repent , devils will tear thee in pieces.GOOD ANGEL. Repent , and they shall never raze thy skin. [ Exeunt ANGELS . ]
O Christ , my Saviour , my SaviourHelp to save distressed Faustus ' soul ! Enter LUCIFER , BELZEBUB , and MEPHISTOPHILIS .
Christ can not save thy soul , for he is just : There 's none but I have interest in the same .
O , what art thou that look'st so terribly ?
I am Lucifer , And this is my companion-prince in hell .
O Faustus , they are come to fetch thy soul !
We are come to tell thee thou dost injure us .
Thou call'st of Christ , contrary to thy promise .
Thou shouldst not think on God .
Think of the devil .
And his dam too .
Nor will Faustus henceforth : pardon him for this , And Faustus vows never to look to heaven .
So shalt thou shew thyself an obedient servant , And we will highly gratify thee for it .
Faustus , we are come from hell in person to shew theesome pastime : sit down , and thou shalt behold the Seven DeadlySins appear to thee in their own proper shapes and likeness .
That sight will be as pleasant unto me , As Paradise was to Adam the first dayOf his creation .
Talk not of Paradise or creation ; but mark the show. -- Go , Mephistophilis , and [ 79 ] fetch them in.MEPHISTOPHILIS brings in the SEVEN DEADLY SINS .
Now , Faustus , question them of their names anddispositions .
That shall I soon. -- What art thou , the [ 80 ] first ?
I am Pride. I disdain to have any parents. I am like toOvid 's flea ; I can creep into every corner of a wench ; sometimes , like a perriwig , I sit upon her brow ; next , like a necklace , I hangabout her neck ; then , like a fan of feathers , I kiss her lips ; [ 81 ] and then , turning myself to a wrought smock , do what I list.But , fie , what a smell is here ! I 'll not speak a word more fora king 's ransom , unless the ground be perfumed , and covered withcloth of arras .
Thou art a proud knave , indeed. -- What art thou , the second ?
I am Covetousness , begotten of an old churl , in aleather bag : and , might I now obtain my wish , this house , you , and all , should turn to gold , that I might lock you safe intomy chest : O my sweet gold !
And what art thou , the third ?
I am Envy , begotten of a chimney-sweeper and an oyster-wife.I can not read , and therefore wish all books burned. I am leanwith seeing others eat. O , that there would come a famine overall the world , that all might die , and I live alone ! then thoushouldst see how fat I 'd be. But must thou sit , and I stand ? come down , with a vengeance !
Out , envious wretch ! -- But what art thou , the fourth ?
I am Wrath. I had neither father nor mother : I leaptout of a lion 's mouth when I was scarce an hour old ; and eversince have run [ 82 ] up and down the world with this [ 83 ] case ofrapiers , wounding myself when I could get none to fight withal.I was born in hell ; and look to it , for some of you shall be myfather .
And what art thou , the fifth ?
I am Gluttony. My parents are all dead , and the devila penny they have left me , but a small pension , and that buys methirty meals a-day and ten bevers , -- a small trifle to sufficenature. I come [ 84 ] of a royal pedigree : my father was a Gammonof Bacon , my mother was a Hogshead of Claret-wine ; my godfatherswere these , Peter Pickled-herring and Martin Martlemas-beef ; butmy godmother , O , she was an ancient gentlewoman ; her name wasMargery March-beer. Now , Faustus , thou hast heard all my progeny ; wilt thou bid me to supper ?
Not I .
Then the devil choke thee !
Choke thyself , glutton ! -- What art thou , the sixth ?
Heigho ! I am Sloth. I was begotten on a sunny bank.Heigho ! I 'll not speak a word more for a king 's ransom .
And what are you , Mistress Minx , the seventh and last ?
Who , I , [ 85 ] sir ? I am one that loves an inch of rawmutton better than an ell of fried stock-fish ; and the firstletter of my name begins with L. [ 86 ]
Away to hell , away ! On , piper ! [ Exeunt the SINS . ]
O , how this sight doth delight my soul !
Tut , [ 87 ] Faustus , in hell is all manner of delight .
O , might I see hell , and return again safe , How happy were I then !
Faustus , thou shalt ; at midnight I will send for thee.Meanwhile peruse this book and view it throughly , And thou shalt turn thyself into what shape thou wilt .
Thanks , mighty Lucifer ! This will I keep as chary as my life .
Now , Faustus , farewell .
Farewell , great Lucifer. [ Exeunt LUCIFER and BELZEBUB. ] Come , Mephistophilis. [ Exeunt. ] Enter ROBIN , [ 88 ] with a book .
What , Dick ! look to the horses there , till I come again.I have gotten one of Doctor Faustus ' conjuring-books ; and nowwe 'll have such knavery as't passes.Enter DICK .
What , Robin ! you must come away and walk the horses .
I walk the horses ! I scor n't , faith : [ 89 ] I have othermatters in hand : let the horses walk themselves , an they will. -- [ Reads. ] A per se , a ; t , h , e , the ; o per se , o ; Demy orgon gorgon. -- Keep further from me , O thou illiterate and unlearned hostler !
'Snails , what hast thou got there ? a book ! why , thou canstnot tell [ 90 ] ne'er a word o n't .
That thou shalt see presently : keep out of the circle , I say , lest I send you into the ostry with a vengeance .
That 's like , faith ! you had best leave your foolery ; for , an my master come , he 'll conjure you , faith .
My master conjure me ! I 'll tell thee what ; an my mastercome here , I 'll clap as fair a [ 91 ] pair of horns on 's head ase'er thou sawest in thy life .
Thou need'st [ 92 ] not do that , for my mistress hath done it .
Ay , there be of us here that have waded as deep intomatters as other men , if they were disposed to talk .
A plague take you ! I thought you did not sneak up and downafter her for nothing. But , I prithee , tell me in good sadness , Robin , is that a conjuring-book ?
Do but speak what thou'lt have me to do , and I 'll do't : if thou'lt dance naked , put off thy clothes , and I 'll conjurethee about presently ; or , if thou'lt go but to the tavern withme , I 'll give thee white wine , red wine , claret-wine , sack , muscadine , malmsey , and whippincrust , hold , belly , hold ; [ 93 ] andwe 'll not pay one penny for it .
O , brave ! Prithee , [ 94 ] let 's to it presently , for I am asdry as a dog .
Come , then , let 's away. [ Exeunt. ] Enter CHORUS .
I have , my Faustus ; and , for proof thereof , This is the goodly palace of the Pope ; And , 'cause we are no common guests , I choose his privy-chamber for our use .
I hope his Holiness will bid us [ 105 ] welcome .
All 's one , for we 'll be bold with his venison.But now , my Faustus , that thou mayst perceiveWhat Rome contains for to delight thine eyes , Know that this city stands upon seven hillsThat underprop the groundwork of the same : Just through [ 106 ] the midst runs flowing Tiber 's stream , With winding banks that cut it in two parts ; Over the which two stately bridges lean , That make safe passage to each part of Rome : Upon the bridge call 'd Ponte [ 107 ] AngeloErected is a castle passing strong , Where thou shalt see such store of ordnance , As that the double cannons , forg 'd of brass , Do match [ 108 ] the number of the days contain'dWithin the compass of one complete year ; Beside the gates , and high pyramides , That Julius Caesar brought from Africa .
Now , by the kingdoms of infernal rule , Of Styx , of Acheron , and the fiery lakeOf ever-burning Phlegethon , I swearThat I do long to see the [ 109 ] monumentsAnd situation of bright-splendent Rome : Come , therefore , let 's away .
Nay , stay , my Faustus : I know you 'd see the Pope , And take some part of holy Peter 's feast , The which , in state and [ 110 ] high solemnity , This day , is held through Rome and Italy , In honour of the Pope 's triumphant victory .
Sweet Mephistophilis , thou pleasest me.Whilst I am here on earth , let me be cloy'dWith all things that delight the heart of man : My four-and-twenty years of libertyI 'll spend in pleasure and in dalliance , That Faustus ' name , whilst [ 111 ] this bright frame doth stand , May be admir 'd thorough [ 112 ] the furthest land .
'T is well said , Faustus. Come , then , stand by me , And thou shalt see them come immediately .
Nay , stay , my gentle Mephistophilis , And grant me my [ 113 ] request , and then I go.Thou know'st , within the compass of eight daysWe view 'd the face of heaven , of earth , and hell ; So high our dragons soar 'd into the air , That , looking down , the earth appear 'd to meNo bigger than my hand in quantity ; There did we view the kingdoms of the world , And what might please mine eye I there beheld.Then in this show let me an actor be , That this proud Pope may Faustus ' cunning [ 114 ] see .
Let it be so , my Faustus. But , first , stay , And view their triumphs as they pass this way ; And then devise what best contents thy mind , By cunning in thine art to cross the Pope , Or dash the pride of this [ 115 ] solemnity ; To make his monks and abbots stand like apes , And point like antics at [ 116 ] his triple crown ; To beat the beads about the friars ' pates , Or clap huge horns upon the Cardinals ' heads ; Or any villany thou canst devise ; And I 'll perform it , [ 117 ] Faustus. Hark ! they come : This day shall make thee be admir 'd in Rome.Enter the CARDINALS and BISHOPS , some bearing crosiers , somethe pillars ; MONKS and FRIARS , singing their procession ; then the POPE , RAYMOND king of Hungary , the ARCHBISHOPOF RHEIMS , BRUNO led in chains , and ATTENDANTS .
Cast down our footstool .
Saxon Bruno , stoop , Whilst on thy back his Holiness ascendsSaint Peter 's chair and state pontifical .
Proud Lucifer , that state belongs to me ; But thus I fall to Peter , not to thee .
To me and Peter shalt thou grovelling lie , And crouch before the Papal dignity. -- Sound trumpets , then ; for thus Saint Peter 's heir , From Bruno 's back , ascends Saint Peter 's chair. [ A flourish while he ascends. ] Thus , as the gods creep on with feet of wool , Long ere with iron hands they punish men , So shall our sleeping vengeance now arise , And smite with death thy hated enterprise. [ 118 ] -- Lord Cardinals of France and Padua , Go forthwith to our [ 119 ] holy consistory , And read , amongst the statutes decretal , What , by the holy council held at Trent , The sacred synod hath decreed for himThat doth assume the Papal governmentWithout election and a true consent : Away , and bring us word with speed.CARDINAL OF FRANCE. We go , my lord. [ Exeunt CARDINALS of France and Padua . ]
Lord Raymond. [ They converse in dumb show . ]
Go , haste thee , gentle Mephistophilis , Follow the cardinals to the consistory ; And , as they turn their superstitious books , Strike them with sloth and drowsy idleness , And make them sleep so sound , that in their shapesThyself and I may parley with this [ 120 ] Pope , This proud confronter of the Emperor ; And , in despite of all his holiness , Restore this Bruno to his liberty , And bear him to the states of Germany .
Faustus , I go .
Despatch it soon : The Pope shall curse , that Faustus came to Rome. [ Exeunt FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS . ]
Pope Adrian , let me have right [ 121 ] of law : I was elected by the Emperor .
We will depose the Emperor for that deed , And curse the people that submit to him : Both he and thou shall [ 122 ] stand excommunicate , And interdict from church 's privilegeAnd all society of holy men.He grows too proud in his authority , Lifting his lofty head above the clouds , And , like a steeple , overpeers the church : But we 'll pull down his haughty insolence ; And , as Pope Alexander , our progenitor , Trod on the neck of German Frederick , Adding this golden sentence to our praise , '' That Peter 's heirs should tread on Emperors , And walk upon the dreadful adder 's back , Treading the lion and the dragon down , And fearless spurn the killing basilisk , '' So will we quell that haughty schismatic , And , by authority apostolical , Depose him from his regal government .
Pope Julius swore to princely Sigismond , For him and the succeeding Popes of Rome , To hold the Emperors their lawful lords .
Pope Julius did abuse the church 's rights , And therefore none of his decrees can stand.Is not all power on earth bestow 'd on us ? And therefore , though we would , we can not err.Behold this silver belt , whereto is fix'dSeven golden seals , fast sealed with seven seals , In token of our seven-fold power from heaven , To bind or loose , lock fast , condemn or judge , Resign or seal , or what so pleaseth us : Then he and thou , and all the world , shall stoop , Or be assured of our dreadful curse , To light as heavy as the pains of hell.Re-enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS , in the shapes of theCARDINALS of France and Padua .
Now tell me , Faustus , are we not fitted well ?
Yes , Mephistophilis ; and two such cardinalsNe'er serv 'd a holy Pope as we shall do.But , whilst they sleep within the consistory , Let us salute his reverend fatherhood .
Behold , my lord , the Cardinals are return 'd .
Welcome , grave fathers : answer presentlyWhat hath [ 123 ] our holy council there decreedConcerning Bruno and the Emperor , In quittance of their late conspiracyAgainst our state and papal dignity ?
Most sacred patron of the church of Rome , By full consent of all the synod [ 124 ] Of priests and prelates , it is thus decreed , -- That Bruno and the German EmperorBe held as Lollards and bold schismatics , And proud disturbers of the church 's peace ; And if that Bruno , by his own assent , Without enforcement of the German peers , Did seek to wear the triple diadem , And by your death to climb Saint Peter 's chair , The statutes decretal have thus decreed , -- He shall be straight condemn 'd of heresy , And on a pile of faggots burnt to death .
It is enough. Here , take him to your charge , And bear him straight to Ponte [ 125 ] Angelo , And in the strongest tower enclose him fast.To-morrow , sitting in our consistory , With all our college of grave cardinals , We will determine of his life or death.Here , take his [ 126 ] triple crown along with you , And leave it in the church 's treasury.Make haste again , my good Lord Cardinals , And take our blessing apostolical .
So , so ; was never devil thus bless 'd before .
Away , sweet Mephistophilis , be gone ; The Cardinals will be plagu 'd for this anon. [ Exeunt FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS with BRUNO . ]
Go presently and bring a banquet forth , That we may solemnize Saint Peter 's feast , And with Lord Raymond , King of Hungary , Drink to our late and happy victory.A Sennet [ 127 ] while the banquet is brought in ; and then enterFAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS in their own shapes .
Now , Faustus , come , prepare thyself for mirth : The sleepy Cardinals are hard at hand , To censure Bruno , that is posted hence , And on a proud-pac 'd steed , as swift as thought , Flies o'er the Alps to fruitful Germany , There to salute the woful Emperor .
The Pope will curse them for their sloth to-day , That slept both Bruno and his crown away.But now , that Faustus may delight his mind , And by their folly make some merriment , Sweet Mephistophilis , so charm me here , That I may walk invisible to all , And do whate'er I please , unseen of any .
Faustus , thou shalt : then kneel down presently , Whilst on thy head I lay my hand , And charm thee with this magic wand.First , wear this girdle ; then appearInvisible to all are here : The planets seven , the gloomy air , Hell , and the Furies ' forked hair , Pluto 's blue fire , and Hecat 's tree , With magic spells so compass thee , That no eye may thy body see ! So , Faustus , now , for all their holiness , Do what thou wilt , thou shalt not be discern 'd .
Thanks , Mephistophilis. -- Now , friars , take heed , Lest Faustus make your shaven crowns to bleed .
Faustus , no more : see , where the Cardinals come ! Re-enter the CARDINALS of France and Padua with a book .
Welcome , Lord Cardinals ; come , sit down. -- Lord Raymond , take your seat. -- Friars , attend , And see that all things be [ 128 ] in readiness , As best beseems this solemn festival.CARDINAL OF FRANCE. First , may it please your sacred HolinessTo view the sentence of the reverend synodConcerning Bruno and the Emperor ?
What needs this question ? did I not tell you , To-morrow we would sit i ' the consistory , And there determine of his punishment ? You brought us word even now , it was decreedThat Bruno and the cursed EmperorWere by the holy council both condemn'dFor loathed Lollards and base schismatics : Then wherefore would you have me view that book ? CARDINAL OF FRANCE. Your grace mistakes ; you gave us no such charge .
Deny it not ; we all are witnessesThat Bruno here was late deliver 'd you , With his rich triple crown to be reserv'dAnd put into the church 's treasury.BOTH CARDINALS. By holy Paul , we saw them not !
By Peter , you shall die , Unless you bring them forth immediately ! -- Hale them to [ 129 ] prison , lade their limbs with gyves. -- False prelates , for this hateful treacheryCurs 'd be your souls to hellish misery ! [ Exeunt ATTENDANTS with the two CARDINALS . ]
So , they are safe. Now , Faustus , to the feast : The Pope had never such a frolic guest .
Lord Archbishop of Rheims , sit down with us .
[ 130 ] I thank your Holiness .
Fall to ; the devil choke you , [ 131 ] an you spare !
Who is that spoke ? -- Friars , look about. -- Lord Raymond , pray , fall to. I am beholding [ 132 ] To the Bishop of Milan for this so rare a present .
I thank you , sir. [ Snatches the dish . ]
How now ! who snatch 'd the meat from me ? Villains , why speak you not ? -- My good Lord Archbishop , here 's a most dainty dishWas sent me from a cardinal in France .
I 'll have that too. [ Snatches the dish . ]
What Lollards do attend our holiness , That we receive such [ 133 ] great indignity ? Fetch me some wine .
Ay , pray , do , for Faustus is a-dry .
Lord Raymond , I drink unto your grace .
I pledge your grace. [ Snatches the cup . ]
My wine gone too ! -- Ye lubbers , look about , And find the man that doth this villany , Or , by our sanctitude , you all shall die ! -- I pray , my lords , have patience at thisTroublesome banquet .
Please it [ 134 ] your Holiness , I think it be some ghostcrept out of Purgatory , and now is come unto your Holiness for hispardon .
It may be so. -- Go , then , command our priests to sing a dirge , To lay the fury of this same troublesome ghost. [ Exit an ATTENDANT. -- The POPE crosses himself . ]
How now ! must every bit be spic 'd with a cross ? -- Nay , then , take that. [ Strikes the POPE . ]
O , I am slain ! -- Help me , my lords ! O , come and help to bear my body hence ! -- Damn 'd be his [ 135 ] soul for ever for this deed ! [ Exeunt all except FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS . ]
Now , Faustus , what will you do now ? for I can tell youyou 'll be cursed with bell , book , and candle .
Bell , book , and candle , -- candle , book , and bell , -- Forward and backward , to curse Faustus to hell ! Re-enter the FRIARS , with bell , book , and candle , for theDirge.FIRST FRIAR. Come , brethren , lets about our business with gooddevotion. [ They sing. ] CURSED BE HE THAT STOLE HIS HOLINESS ' MEAT FROM THE TABLE ! maledicat Dominus ! CURSED BE HE THAT STRUCK [ 136 ] HIS HOLINESS A BLOW ON [ 137 ] THEFACE ! maledicat Dominus ! CURSED BE HE THAT STRUCK FRIAR SANDELO A BLOW ON THE PATE ! maledicat Dominus ! CURSED BE HE THAT DISTURBETH OUR HOLY DIRGE ! maledicatDominus ! CURSED BE HE THAT TOOK AWAY HIS HOLINESS ' WINE ! maledicatDominus ! [ MEPHISTOPHILIS and FAUSTUS beat the FRIARS , and flingfire-works among them , and exeunt. ] Enter ROBIN and DICK with a cup .
Sirrah Robin , we were best look that your devil can answerthe stealing of this same [ 138 ] cup , for the Vintner 's boy followsus at the hard heels. [ 139 ]
'T is no matter ; let him come : an he follow us , I 'll soconjure him as he was never conjured in his life , I warrant him.Let me see the cup .
Here 't is . [ Gives the cup to ROBIN. ] Yonder he comes : now , Robin , now or never shew thy cunning.Enter VINTNER. [ 140 ]
O , are you here ? I am glad I have found you. You area couple of fine companions : pray , where 's the cup you stolefrom the tavern ?
How , how ! we steal a cup ! take heed what you say : we looknot like cup-stealers , I can tell you .
Never deny't , for I know you have it ; and I 'll search you .
Search me ! ay , and spare not. -- Hold the cup , Dick [ Aside to DICK , giving him the cup ] . -- Come , come , search me , search me. [ VINTNER searches him . ]
Come on , sirrah , let me search you now .
Ay , ay , do , do. -- Hold the cup , Robin [ Aside to ROBIN , giving him the cup ] . -- I fear not your searching : we scorn to steal your [ 141 ] cups , I can tell you. [ VINTNER searches him . ]
Never out-face me for the matter ; for , sure , the cupis between you two .
Nay , there you lie ; 't is beyond us both .
A plague take you ! I thought 't was your knavery to takeit away : come , give it me again .
Ay , much ! [ 142 ] when , can you tell ? -- Dick , make me a circle , and stand close at my back , and stir not for thy life. -- Vintner , you shall have your cup anon. -- Say nothing , Dick. -- [ Reads froma book ] O per se , O ; Demogorgon ; Belcher , and Mephistophilis ! Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS .
You princely legions of infernal rule , How am I vexed by these villains ' charms ! From Constantinople have they brought me now , Only for pleasure of these damned slaves. [ Exit VINTNER . ]
By lady , [ 143 ] sir , you have had a shrewd journey of it ! will it please you to [ 144 ] take a shoulder of mutton to supper , and a tester [ 145 ] in your purse , and go back again ?
Ay , I pray you heartily , sir ; for we called you but in jest , I promise you .
To purge the rashness of this cursed deed , First , be thou turned to this ugly shape , For apish deeds transformed to an ape .
O , brave ! an ape ! I pray , sir , let me have the carryingof him about , to shew some tricks .
And so thou shalt : be thou transformed to a dog , andcarry him upon thy back. Away ! be gone !
A dog ! that 's excellent : let the maids look well to theirporridge-pots , for I 'll into the kitchen presently. -- Come , Dick , come. [ Exeunt ROBIN and DICK . ]
Now with the flames of ever-burning fireI 'll wing myself , and forthwith fly amain ( sic ) Unto my Faustus , to the Great Turk 's court. [ Exit. ] Enter MARTINO and FREDERICK at several doors .
What , ho , officers , gentlemen ! Hie to the presence to attend the Emperor. -- Good Frederick , see the rooms be voided straight : His majesty is coming to the hall ; Go back , and see the state [ 146 ] in readiness .
But where is Bruno , our elected Pope , That on a Fury 's back came post from Rome ? Will not his grace consort the Emperor ?
O , yes ; and with him comes the German conjurer , The learned Faustus , fame of Wittenberg , The wonder of the world for magic art ; And he intends to shew great CarolusThe race of all his stout progenitors , And bring in presence of his majestyThe royal shapes and perfect [ 147 ] semblancesOf Alexander and his beauteous paramour .
Where is Benvolio ?
Fast asleep , I warrant you ; He took his rouse [ 148 ] with stoops of Rhenish wineSo kindly yesternight to Bruno 's health , That all this day the sluggard keeps his bed .
See , see , his window 's ope ! we 'll call to him .
What , ho ! Benvolio ! Enter BENVOLIO above , at a window , in his nightcap , buttoning .
What a devil ail you two ?
Speak softly , sir , lest the devil hear you ; For Faustus at the court is late arriv 'd , And at his heels a [ 149 ] thousand Furies wait , To accomplish whatsoe'er the doctor please .
What of this ?
Come , leave thy chamber first , and thou shalt seeThis conjurer perform such rare exploits , Before the Pope and royal Emperor , As never yet was seen in Germany .
Has not the Pope enough of conjuring yet ? He was upon the devil 's back late enough : An if he be so far in love with him , I would he would post with him to Rome again !
Speak , wilt thou come and see this sport ?
Not I .
Wilt thou stand in thy window , and see it , then ?
Ay , an I fall not asleep i ' the mean time .
The Emperor is at hand , who comes to seeWhat wonders by black spells may compass 'd be .
Well , go you attend the Emperor. I am content , forthis once , to thrust my head out at a [ 150 ] window ; for theysay , if a man be drunk over night , the devil can not hurt himin the morning : if that be true , I have a charm in my head , shall control him as well as the conjurer , I warrant you. [ Exeunt FREDERICK and MARTINO. ] A Sennet. Enter CHARLES the German Emperor , BRUNO , DUKE OF SAXONY , FAUSTUS , MEPHISTOPHILIS , FREDERICK , MARTINO , and Attendants .
Wonder of men , renowm 'd [ 151 ] magician , Thrice-learned Faustus , welcome to our court.This deed of thine , in setting Bruno freeFrom his and our professed enemy , Shall add more excellence unto thine artThan if by powerful necromantic spellsThou couldst command the world 's obedience : For ever be belov 'd of Carolus ! And if this Bruno , thou hast late redeem 'd , In peace possess the triple diadem , And sit in Peter 's chair , despite of chance , Thou shalt be famous through [ 152 ] all Italy , And honour 'd of the German Emperor .
These [ 153 ] gracious words , most royal Carolus , Shall make poor Faustus , to his utmost power , Both love and serve the German Emperor , And lay his life at holy Bruno 's feet : For proof whereof , if so your grace be pleas 'd , The doctor stands prepar 'd by power of artTo cast his magic charms , that shall pierce through [ 154 ] The ebon gates of ever-burning hell , And hale the stubborn Furies from their caves , To compass whatsoe'er your grace commands .
Blood , he speaks terribly ! but , for all that , I do notgreatly believe him : he looks as like a [ 155 ] conjurer as the Popeto a costermonger. [ Aside . ]
Then , Faustus , as thou late didst promise us , We would behold that famous conqueror , Great Alexander , and his paramour , In their true shapes and state majestical , That we may wonder at their excellence .
Your majesty shall see them presently. -- Mephistophilis , away , And , with a solemn noise of trumpets ' sound , Present before this [ 156 ] royal EmperorGreat Alexander and his beauteous paramour .
Faustus , I will. [ Exit . ]
Well , Master Doctor , an your devils come not awayquickly , you shall have me asleep presently : zounds , I couldeat myself for anger , to think I have been such an ass all thiswhile , to stand gaping after the devil 's governor , and can seenothing !
I 'll make you feel something anon , if my art fail me not. -- My lord , I must forewarn your majesty , That , when my spirits present the royal shapesOf Alexander and his paramour , Your grace demand [ 157 ] no questions of the king , But in dumb silence let them come and go .
Be it as Faustus please ; we are content .
Ay , ay , and I am content too : an thou bring Alexanderand his paramour before the Emperor , I 'll be Actaeon , and turnmyself to a stag .
And I 'll play Diana , and send you the horns presently.Sennet. Enter , at one door , [ 158 ] the EMPEROR ALEXANDER , atthe other , DARIUS. They meet. DARIUS is thrown down ; ALEXANDER kills him , takes off his crown , and , offering togo out , his PARAMOUR meets him. He embraceth her , and setsDARIUS ' crown upon her head ; and , coming back , both salutethe EMPEROR , who , leaving his state , [ 159 ] offers to embracethem ; which FAUSTUS seeing , suddenly stays him. Then trumpetscease , and music sounds.My gracious lord , you do forget yourself ; These [ 160 ] are but shadows , not substantial .
O , pardon me ! my thoughts are so ravish'dWith sight of this renowmed [ 161 ] emperor , That in mine arms I would have compass 'd him.But , Faustus , since I may not speak to them , To satisfy my longing thoughts [ 162 ] at full , Let me this tell thee : I have heard it saidThat this fair lady , whilst [ 163 ] she liv 'd on earth , Had on her neck a little wart or mole ; How may I prove that saying to be true ?
Your majesty may boldly go and see .
Faustus , I see it plain ; And in this sight thou better pleasest meThan if I gain 'd [ 164 ] another monarchy .
Away ! be gone ! [ Exit show. ] -- See , see , my graciouslord ! what strange beast is yon , that thrusts his head out atwindow ? [ 165 ]
O , wondrous sight ! -- See , Duke of Saxony , Two spreading horns most strangely fastenedUpon the head of young Benvolio !
What , is he asleep or dead ?
He sleeps , my lord ; but dreams not of his horns .
This sport is excellent : we 'll call and wake him. -- What , ho , Benvolio !
A plague upon you ! let me sleep a while .
I blame thee not to sleep much , having such a head ofthine own .
Look up , Benvolio ; 't is the Emperor calls .
The Emperor ! where ? -- O , zounds , my head !
Nay , an thy horns hold , 't is no matter for thy head , for that 's armed sufficiently .
Why , how now , Sir Knight ! what , hanged by the horns ! this is [ 166 ] most horrible : fie , fie , pull in your head , forshame ! let not all the world wonder at you .
Zounds , doctor , this is [ 167 ] your villany !
O , say not so , sir ! the doctor has no skill , No art , no cunning , to present these lords , Or bring before this royal EmperorThe mighty monarch , warlike Alexander.If Faustus do it , you are straight resolv 'd , In bold Actaeon 's shape , to turn a stag : -- And therefore , my lord , so please your majesty , I 'll raise a kennel of hounds shall hunt him soAs [ 168 ] all his footmanship shall scarce prevailTo keep his carcass from their bloody fangs. -- Ho , Belimoth , Argiron , Asteroth ! [ 169 ]
Hold , hold ! -- Zounds , he 'll raise up a kennel of devils , I think , anon. -- Good my lord , entreat for me. -- 'Sblood , I am neverable to endure these torments .
Then , good Master Doctor , Let me entreat you to remove his horns ; He has [ 170 ] done penance now sufficiently .
My gracious lord , not so much for injury done to me , as to delight your majesty with some mirth , hath Faustus justlyrequited this injurious knight ; which being all I desire , I amcontent to remove his horns. [ 171 ] -- Mephistophilis , transform him [ MEPHISTOPHILIS removes the horns ] : -- and hereafter , sir , [ 172 ] look you speak well of scholars .
Speak well of ye ! 'sblood , an scholars be suchcuckold-makers , to clap horns of [ 173 ] honest men 's heads o ' thisorder , I 'll ne'er trust smooth faces and small ruffs more. -- But , an I be not revenged for this , would I might be turned to agaping oyster , and drink nothing but salt water ! [ Aside , and then exit above . ]
Come , Faustus : while the Emperor lives , In recompense of this thy high desert , Thou shalt command the state of Germany , And live belov 'd of mighty Carolus. [ Exeunt. ] Enter BENVOLIO , MARTINO , FREDERICK , and SOLDIERS .
Nay , sweet Benvolio , let us sway [ 174 ] thy thoughtsFrom this attempt against the conjurer. [ 175 ]
Away ! you love me not , to urge me thus : Shall I let slip so great an injury , When every servile groom jests at my wrongs , And in their rustic gambols proudly say , '' Benvolio 's head was grac 'd with horns today ? '' O , may these eyelids never close again , Till with my sword I have that [ 176 ] conjurer slain ! If you will aid me in this enterprise , Then draw your weapons and be resolute ; If not , depart : here will Benvolio die , But Faustus ' death shall quit my [ 177 ] infamy .
Nay , we will stay with thee , betide what may , And kill that [ 178 ] doctor , if he come this way .
Then , gentle Frederick , hie thee to the grove , And place our servants and our followersClose in an [ 179 ] ambush there behind the trees.By this , I know the conjurer is near : I saw him kneel , and kiss the Emperor 's hand , And take his leave , laden with rich rewards.Then , soldiers , boldly [ 180 ] fight : if Faustus die , Take you the wealth , leave us the victory .
Come , soldiers , follow me unto the grove : Who kills him shall have gold and endless love. [ Exit FREDERICK with SOLDIERS . ]
My head is lighter , than it was , by the horns ; But yet my heart 's [ 181 ] more ponderous than my head , And pants until I see that [ 182 ] conjurer dead .
Where shall we place ourselves , Benvolio ?
Here will we stay to bide the first assault : O , were that damned hell-hound but in place , Thou soon shouldst see me quit my foul disgrace ! Re-enter FREDERICK .
Close , close ! the conjurer is at hand , And all alone comes walking in his gown ; Be ready , then , and strike the [ 183 ] peasant down .
Mine be that honour , then. Now , sword , strike home ! For horns he gave I 'll have his head anon .
See , see , he comes ! Enter FAUSTUS with a false head .
No words. This blow ends all : Hell take his soul ! his body thus must fall. [ Stabs FAUSTUS . ]
[ falling. ] O !
Groan you , Master Doctor ?
Break may his heart with groans ! -- Dear Frederick , see , Thus will I end his griefs immediately .
Strike with a willing hand. [ BENVOLIO strikes off FAUSTUS ' head. ] His head is off .
The devil 's dead ; the Furies now [ 184 ] may laugh .
Was this that stern aspect , that awful frown , Made the grim monarch of infernal spiritsTremble and quake at his commanding charms ?
Was this that damned head , whose art [ 185 ] conspir'dBenvolio 's shame before the Emperor ?
Ay , that 's the head , and there [ 186 ] the body lies , Justly rewarded for his villanies .
Come , let 's devise how we may add more shameTo the black scandal of his hated name .
First , on his head , in quittance of my wrongs , I 'll nail huge forked horns , and let them hangWithin the window where he yok 'd me first , That all the world may see my just revenge .
What use shall we put his beard to ?
We 'll sell it to a chimney-sweeper : it will wear outten birchen brooms , I warrant you .
What shall his [ 187 ] eyes do ?
We 'll pull [ 188 ] out his eyes ; and they shall serve forbuttons to his lips , to keep his tongue from catching cold .
An excellent policy ! and now , sirs , having divided him , what shall the body do ? [ FAUSTUS rises . ]
Zounds , the devil 's alive again !
Give him his head , for God 's sake .
Pity us , gentle Faustus ! save our lives !
Away !
He must needs go that the devil drives. [ Exeunt MEPHISTOPHILIS and DEVILS with BENVOLIO , MARTINO , and FREDERICK. ] Enter the ambushed SOLDIERS. [ 192 ] FIRST SOLDIER. Come , sirs , prepare yourselves in readiness ; Make haste to help these noble gentlemen : I heard them parley with the conjurer.SECOND SOLDIER. See , where he comes ! despatch and kill the slave .
What 's here ? an ambush to betray my life ! Then , Faustus , try thy skill. -- Base peasants , stand ! For , lo , these [ 193 ] trees remove at my command , And stand as bulwarks 'twixt yourselves and me , To shield me from your hated treachery ! Yet , to encounter this your weak attempt , Behold , an army comes incontinent ! FAUSTUS strikes the door , [ 194 ] and enter a DEVIL playingon a drum ; after him another , bearing an ensign ; and diverswith weapons ; MEPHISTOPHILIS with fire-works. They set uponthe SOLDIERS , drive them out , and exeunt.Enter , at several doors , BENVOLIO , FREDERICK , and MARTINO , their heads and faces bloody , and besmeared with mud anddirt ; all having horns on their heads .
What , ho , Benvolio !
Here. -- What , Frederick , ho !
O , help me , gentle friend ! -- Where is Martino ?
Dear Frederick , here , Half smother 'd in a lake of mud and dirt , Through which the Furies dragg 'd me by the heels .
Martino , see , Benvolio 's horns again !
O , misery ! -- How now , Benvolio !
Defend me , heaven ! shall I be haunted still ?
Nay , fear not , man ; we have no power to kill .
My friends transformed thus ! O , hellish spite ! Your heads are all set with horns .
You hit it right ; It is your own you mean ; feel on your head .
Zounds , [ 195 ] horns again !
Nay , chafe not , man ; we all are [ 196 ] sped .
What devil attends this damn 'd magician , That , spite of spite , our wrongs are doubled ?
What may we do , that we may hide our shames ?
If we should follow him to work revenge , He 'd join long asses ' ears to these huge horns , And make us laughing-stocks to all the world .
What shall we , then , do , dear Benvolio ?
I have a castle joining near these woods ; And thither we 'll repair , and live obscure , Till time shall alter these [ 197 ] our brutish shapes : Sith black disgrace hath thus eclips 'd our fame , We 'll rather die with grief than live with shame. [ Exeunt. ] Enter FAUSTUS , a HORSE-COURSER , and MEPHISTOPHILIS.HORSE-COURSER. I beseech your worship , accept of these forty dollars .
Friend , thou canst not buy so good a horse for so smalla price. I have no great need to sell him : but , if thou likesthim for ten dollars more , take him , because I see thou hast agood mind to him.HORSE-COURSER. I beseech you , sir , accept of this : I am a verypoor man , and have lost very much of late by horse-flesh , andthis bargain will set me up again .
Well , I will not stand with thee : give me the money [ HORSE-COURSER gives FAUSTUS the money ] . Now , sirrah , I musttell you that you may ride him o'er hedge and ditch , and sparehim not ; but , do you hear ? in any case , ride him not into thewater.HORSE-COURSER. How , sir ! not into the water ! why , will he notdrink of all waters ?
Yes , he will drink of all waters ; but ride him not intothe water : o'er hedge and ditch , or where thou wilt , but not intothe water. Go , bid the hostler deliver him unto you , and rememberwhat I say.HORSE-COURSER. I warrant you , sir ! -- O , joyful day ! now am I amade man for ever. [ Exit . ]
What art thou , Faustus , but a man condemn 'd to die ? Thy fatal time draws to a final end ; Despair doth drive distrust into my thoughts : Confound these passions with a quiet sleep : Tush , Christ did call the thief upon the Cross ; Then rest thee , Faustus , quiet in conceit. [ He sits to sleep. ] Re-enter the HORSE-COURSER , wet.HORSE-COURSER. 0 , what a cozening doctor was this ! I , ridingmy horse into the water , thinking some hidden mystery had beenin the horse , I had nothing under me but a little straw , and hadmuch ado to escape [ 198 ] drowning. Well , I 'll go rouse him , andmake him give me my forty dollars again. -- Ho , sirrah Doctor , youcozening scab ! Master Doctor , awake , and rise , and give me mymoney again , for your horse is turned to a bottle of hay , MasterDoctor ! [ He pulls off FAUSTUS ' leg ] . Alas , I am undone ! whatshall I do ? I have pulled off his leg .
O , help , help ! the villain hath murdered me.HORSE-COURSER. Murder or not murder , now he has [ 199 ] but one leg , I 'll outrun him , and cast this leg into some ditch or other. [ Aside , and then runs out . ]
Stop him , stop him , stop him ! -- Ha , ha , ha ! Faustus hathhis leg again , and the Horse-courser a bundle of hay for hisforty dollars.Enter WAGNER.How now , Wagner ! what news with thee ?
If it please you , the Duke of Vanholt doth earnestlyentreat your company , and hath sent some of his men to attendyou , [ 200 ] with provision fit for your journey .
The Duke of Vanholt 's an honourable gentleman , and oneto whom I must be no niggard of my cunning. Come , away ! [ Exeunt.Enter ROBIN , DICK , the HORSE-COURSER , and a CARTER .
Come , my masters , I 'll bring you to the best beer inEurope. -- What , ho , hostess ! where be these whores ? Enter HOSTESS .
How now ! what lack you ? What , my old guess ! [ 201 ] welcome .
Sirrah Dick , dost thou [ 202 ] know why I stand so mute ?
No , Robin : why is't ?
I am eighteen-pence on the score. but say nothing ; seeif she have forgotten me .
Who 's this that stands so solemnly by himself ? What , my old guest !
O , hostess , how do you ? I hope my score stands still .
Ay , there 's no doubt of that ; for methinks you make nohaste to wipe it out .
Why , hostess , I say , fetch us some beer .
You shall presently. -- Look up into the hall there , ho ! [ Exit. -- Drink is presently brought in . ]
Come , sirs , what shall we do now [ 203 ] till mine hostess comes ?
Marry , sir , [ 204 ] I 'll tell you the bravest tale how aconjurer served me. You know Doctor Faustus ? HORSE-COURSER. Ay , a plague take him ! here 's some on 's have causeto know him. Did he conjure thee too ?
I 'll tell you how he served me. As I was going toWittenberg , t'other day , [ 205 ] with a load of hay , he met me , andasked me what he should give me for as much hay as he could eat.Now , sir , I thinking that a little would serve his turn , bad himtake as much as he would for three farthings : so he presentlygave me my [ 206 ] money and fell to eating ; and , as I am a cursen [ 207 ] man , he never left eating till he had eat up all my load of hay .
O , monstrous ! eat a whole load of hay !
Yes , yes , that may be ; for I have heard of one that has eata load of logs.HORSE-COURSER. Now , sirs , you shall hear how villanously heserved me. I went to him yesterday to buy a horse of him , andhe would by no means sell him under forty dollars. So , sir , because I knew him to be such a horse as would run over hedgeand ditch and never tire , I gave him his money. So , when I hadmy horse , Doctor Faustus bad me ride him night and day , and sparehim no time ; but , quoth he , in any case , ride him not into thewater. Now , sir , I thinking the horse had had some quality [ 208 ] that he would not have me know of , what did I but rid [ 209 ] himinto a great river ? and when I came just in the midst , my horsevanished away , and I sate straddling upon a bottle of hay .
O , brave doctor ! HORSE-COURSER. But you shall hear how bravely I served him forit. I went me home to his house , and there I found him asleep.I kept a hallooing and whooping in his ears ; but all could notwake him. I , seeing that , took him by the leg , and never restedpulling till I had pulled me his leg quite off ; and now 't is athome in mine hostry .
And has the doctor but one leg , then ? that 's excellent ; for one of his devils turned me into the likeness of an ape 's face .
Some more drink , hostess !
Hark you , we 'll into another room and drink a while , andthen we 'll go seek out the doctor. [ Exeunt. ] Enter the DUKE OF VANHOLT , his DUCHESS , FAUSTUS , MEPHISTOPHILIS , and ATTENDANTS .
Thanks , Master Doctor , for these pleasant sights ; nor knowI how sufficiently to recompense your great deserts in erectingthat enchanted castle in the air , [ 210 ] the sight whereof sodelighted [ 211 ] me as nothing in the world could please me more .
I do think myself , my good lord , highly recompensed inthat it pleaseth [ 212 ] your grace to think but well of that whichFaustus hath performed. -- But , gracious lady , it may be that youhave taken no pleasure in those sights ; therefore , I pray youtell me , what is the thing you most desire to have ; be it in theworld , it shall be yours : I have heard that great-bellied womendo long for things are rare and dainty .
True , Master Doctor ; and , since I find you so kind , I will make known unto you what my heart desires to have ; and , were it now summer , as it is January , a dead time of the winter , I would request no better meat than a dish of ripe grapes .
This is but a small matter. -- Go , Mephistophilis ; away ! [ Exit MEPHISTOPHILIS. ] Madam , I will do more than this for your content.Re-Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with grapes.Here now , taste you these : they should be good , for they come [ 213 ] from a far country , I can tell you .
This makes me wonder more than all the rest , that at thistime of the year , when every tree is barren of his fruit , fromwhence you had these ripe grapes. [ 214 ]
Please it your grace , the year is divided into twocircles over the whole world ; so that , when it is winter withus , in the contrary circle it is likewise summer with them , asin India , Saba , and such countries that lie far east , wherethey have fruit twice a-year ; from whence , by means of a swiftspirit that I have , I had these grapes brought , as you see .
And , trust me , they are the sweetest grapes that e'erI tasted.The CLOWNS bounce [ 215 ] at the gate , within .
What rude disturbers have we at the gate ? Go , pacify their fury , set it ope , And then demand of them what they would have. [ They knock again , and call out to talk with FAUSTUS . ]
Why , how now , masters ! what a coil is there ! What is the reason you disturb the Duke ? DICK [ within ] . We have no reason for it ; therefore a fig for him !
Why , saucy varlets , dare you be so bold ? HORSE-COURSER [ within ] . I hope , sir , we have wit enough to bemore bold than welcome .
It appears so : pray , be bold elsewhere , and troublenot the Duke .
What would they have ?
They all cry out to speak with Doctor Faustus.CARTER [ within ] . Ay , and we will speak with him .
Will you , sir ? -- Commit the rascals.DICK [ within ] . Commit with us ! he were as good commit with hisfather as commit with us .
I do beseech your grace , let them come in ; They are good subject for [ 216 ] a merriment .
Do as thou wilt , Faustus ; I give thee leave .
I thank your grace.Enter ROBIN , DICK , CARTER , and HORSE-COURSER.Why , how now , my good friends ! Faith , you are too outrageous : but , come near ; I have procur 'd your pardons : [ 217 ] welcome , all .
Nay , sir , we will be welcome for our money , and we willpay for what we take. -- What , ho ! give 's half a dozen of beer here , and be hanged !
Nay , hark you ; can you tell me [ 218 ] where you are ?
Ay , marry , can I ; we are under heaven .
Ay ; but , Sir Saucebox , know you in what place ? HORSE-COURSER. Ay , ay , the house is good enough to drink in. -- Zouns , fill us some beer , or we 'll break all the barrels inthe house , and dash out all your brains with your bottles !
Be not so furious : come , you shall have beer. -- My lord , beseech you give me leave a while ; I 'll gage my credit 'twill content your grace .
With all my heart , kind doctor ; please thyself ; Our servants and our court 's at thy command .
I humbly thank your grace. -- Then fetch some beer.HORSE-COURSER. Ay , marry , there spake [ 219 ] a doctor , indeed ! and , faith , I 'll drink a health to thy wooden leg for that word .
My wooden leg ! what dost thou mean by that ?
Ha , ha , ha ! -- Dost hear him , [ 220 ] Dick ? he has forgot hisleg.HORSE-COURSER. Ay , ay , he does not stand much upon that .
No , faith ; not much upon a wooden leg .
Good Lord , that flesh and blood should be so frail withyour worship ! Do not you remember a horse-courser you sold ahorse to ?
Yes , I remember I sold one a horse .
And do you remember you bid he should not ride him [ 221 ] into the water ?
Yes , I do very well remember that .
And do you remember nothing of your leg ?
No , in good sooth .
Then , I pray you , [ 222 ] remember your courtesy .
I [ 223 ] thank you , sir .
'T is not so much worth. I pray you , tell me one thing .
What 's that ?
Be both your legs bed-fellows every night together ?
Wouldst thou make a Colossus of me , that thou askest mesuch questions ?
No , truly , sir ; I would make nothing of you ; but I wouldfain know that.Enter HOSTESS with drink .
Then , I assure thee certainly , they are .
I thank you ; I am fully satisfied .
But wherefore dost thou ask ?
For nothing , sir : but methinks you should have a woodenbed-fellow of one of 'em.HORSE-COURSER. Why , do you hear , sir ? did not I [ 224 ] pull offone of your legs when you were asleep ?
But I have it again , now I am awake : look you here , sir .
O , horrible ! had the doctor three legs ?
Do you remember , sir , how you cozened me , and eat up myload of -- -- [ FAUSTUS , in the middle of each speech , charms them dumb . ]
Do you remember how you made me wear an ape 's -- -- HORSE-COURSER. You whoreson conjuring scab , do you remember howyou cozened me with a ho -- --
Ha ' [ 225 ] you forgotten me ? you think to carry it away withyour hey-pass and re-pass : do you remember the dog 's fa -- -- [ Exeunt CLOWNS . ]
Who pays for the ale ? hear you , Master Doctor ; now youhave sent away my guess , [ 226 ] I pray who shall pay me for my a -- -- [ Exit HOSTESS . ]
My lord , We are much beholding [ 227 ] to this learned man .
So are we , madam ; which we will recompenseWith all the love and kindness that we may : His artful sport [ 228 ] drives all sad thoughts away. [ Exeunt. ] Thunder and lightning. Enter DEVILS with covered dishes ; MEPHISTOPHILIS leads them into FAUSTUS 'S study ; then enter
I think my master [ 229 ] means to die shortly ; he has madehis will , and given me his wealth , his house , his goods , [ 230 ] andstore of golden plate , besides two thousand ducats ready-coined.I wonder what he means : if death were nigh , he would not frolicthus. He 's now at supper with the scholars , where there 's suchbelly-cheer as Wagner in his life ne'er [ 231 ] saw the like : and , see where they come ! belike the feast is ended. [ 232 ] [ Exit. ] Enter FAUSTUS , MEPHISTOPHILIS , and two or three SCHOLARS.FIRST SCHOLAR. Master Doctor Faustus , since our conferenceabout fair ladies , which was the beautifulest in all the world , we have determined with ourselves that Helen of Greece was theadmirablest lady that ever lived : therefore , Master Doctor , ifyou will do us so much favour as to let us see that peerlessdame of Greece , whom all the world admires for majesty , we shouldthink ourselves much beholding unto you .
Gentlemen , For that I know your friendship is unfeign 'd , It is not Faustus ' custom to denyThe just request of those that wish him well : You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece , No otherwise for pomp or majestyThan when Sir Paris cross 'd the seas with her , And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.Be silent , then , for danger is in words.Music sounds. MEPHISTOPHILIS brings in HELEN ; she passethover the stage.SECOND SCHOLAR. Was this fair Helen , whose admired worthMade Greece with ten years ' war [ 233 ] afflict poor Troy ? THIRD SCHOLAR. Too simple is my wit [ 234 ] to tell her worth , Whom all the world admires for majesty.FIRST SCHOLAR. Now we have seen the pride of Nature 's work , We 'll take our leaves : and , for this blessed sight , Happy and blest be Faustus evermore !
Gentlemen , farewell : the same wish I to you. [ Exeunt SCHOLARS. ] Enter an OLD MAN.OLD MAN. O gentle Faustus , leave this damned art , This magic , that will charm thy soul to hell , And quite bereave thee of salvation ! Though thou hast now offended like a man , Do not persever in it like a devil : Yet , yet thou hast an amiable soul , If sin by custom grow not into nature ; Then , Faustus , will repentance come too late ; Then thou art banish 'd from the sight of heaven : No mortal can express the pains of hell.It may be , this my exhortationSeems harsh and all unpleasant : let it not ; For , gentle son , I speak it not in wrath , Or envy of thee , [ 235 ] but in tender love , And pity of thy future misery ; And so have hope that this my kind rebuke , Checking thy body , may amend thy soul .
Where art thou , Faustus ? wretch , what hast thou done ? Hell claims his right , and with a roaring voiceSays , `` Faustus , come ; thine hour is almost come ; '' And Faustus now will come to do thee right. [ MEPHISTOPHILIS gives him a dagger. ] OLD MAN. O , stay , good Faustus , stay thy desperate steps ! I see an angel hover o'er thy head , And , with a vial full of precious grace , Offers to pour the same into thy soul : Then call for mercy , and avoid despair .
O friend , I feelThy words to comfort my distressed soul ! Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.OLD MAN. Faustus , I leave thee ; but with grief of heart , Fearing the enemy of thy hapless soul. [ Exit . ]
Accursed Faustus , wretch , what hast thou done ? I do repent ; and yet I do despair : Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast : What shall I do to shun the snares of death ?
Thou traitor , Faustus , I arrest thy soulFor disobedience to my sovereign lord : Revolt , or I 'll in piece-meal tear thy flesh .
I do repent I e'er offended him.Sweet Mephistophilis , entreat thy lordTo pardon my unjust presumption , And with my blood again I will confirmThe former vow I made to Lucifer .
[ 236 ] Do it , then , Faustus , with unfeigned heart , Lest greater dangers do attend thy drift .
Torment , sweet friend , that base and aged man , That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer , With greatest torments [ 237 ] that our hell affords .
His faith is great ; I can not touch his soul ; But what I may afflict [ 238 ] his body withI will attempt , which is but little worth .
One thing , good servant , let me crave of thee , To glut the longing of my heart 's desire , -- That I may have unto my paramourThat heavenly Helen which I saw of late , Whose sweet embraces may extinguish clean [ 239 ] Those thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow , And keep my oath [ 240 ] I made to Lucifer .
This , or what else my Faustus shall desire , Shall be perform 'd in twinkling of an eye.Re-enter HELEN , passing over the stage between two CUPIDS .
Was this the face that launch 'd a thousand ships , And burnt the topless towers of Ilium ? -- Sweet Helen , make me immortal with a kiss. -- [ Kisses her. ] Her lips suck forth my soul : see , where it flies ! -- Come , Helen , come , give me my soul again.Here will I dwell , for heaven is in these lips , And all is dross that is not Helena.I will be Paris , and for love of thee , Instead of Troy , shall Wittenberg be sack 'd ; And I will combat with weak Menelaus , And wear thy colours on my plumed crest ; Yea , I will wound Achilles in the heel , And then return to Helen for a kiss.O , thou art fairer than the evening [ 241 ] airClad in the beauty of a thousand stars ; Brighter art thou than flaming JupiterWhen he appear 'd to hapless Semele ; More lovely than the monarch of the skyIn wanton Arethusa 's azur 'd [ 242 ] arms ; And none but thou shalt [ 243 ] be my paramour ! [ Exeunt. ] Thunder. Enter LUCIFER , BELZEBUB , and MEPHISTOPHILIS .
Thus from infernal Dis do we ascendTo view the subjects of our monarchy , Those souls which sin seals the black sons of hell ; 'Mong which , as chief , Faustus , we come to thee , Bringing with us lasting damnationTo wait upon thy soul : the time is comeWhich makes it forfeit .
And , this gloomy night , Here , in this room , will wretched Faustus be .
And here we 'll stay , To mark him how he doth demean himself .
How should he but in desperate lunacy ? Fond worldling , now his heart-blood dries with grief ; His conscience kills it ; and his [ 244 ] labouring brainBegets a world of idle fantasiesTo over-reach the devil ; but all in vain ; His store of pleasures must be sauc 'd with pain.He and his servant Wagner are at hand ; Both come from drawing Faustus ' latest will.See , where they come ! Enter FAUSTUS and WAGNER .
Say , Wagner , -- thou hast perus 'd my will , -- How dost thou like it ?
Sir , So wondrous well , As in all humble duty I do yieldMy life and lasting service for your love .
Gramercy , [ 245 ] Wagner.Enter SCHOLARS.Welcome , Gentlemen. [ Exit WAGNER. ] FIRST SCHOLAR. Now , worthy Faustus , methinks your looks are chang 'd .
O , gentlemen ! SECOND SCHOLAR. What ails Faustus ?
Ah , my sweet chamber-fellow , had I lived with thee , then had I lived still ! but now must die eternally. Look , sirs , comes he not ? comes he not ? FIRST SCHOLAR. O my dear Faustus , what imports this fear ? SECOND SCHOLAR. Is all our pleasure turn 'd to melancholy ? THIRD SCHOLAR. He is not well with being over-solitary.SECOND SCHOLAR. If it be so , we 'll have physicians , And Faustus shall be cur'd.THIRD SCHOLAR. 'T is but a surfeit , sir ; [ 246 ] fear nothing .
A surfeit of deadly [ 247 ] sin , that hath damned bothbody and soul.SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet , Faustus , look up to heaven , and remembermercy is infinite .
But Faustus ' offence can ne'er be pardoned : the serpentthat tempted Eve may be saved , but not Faustus. O gentlemen , hear me [ 248 ] with patience , and tremble not at my speeches ! Thoughmy heart pant and quiver to remember that I have been a studenthere these thirty years , O , would I had never [ 249 ] seen Wittenberg , never read book ! and what wonders I have done , all Germany canwitness , yea , all the world ; for which Faustus hath lost bothGermany and the world , yea , heaven itself , heaven , the seat ofGod , the throne of the blessed , the kingdom of joy ; and mustremain in hell for ever , hell. O , hell , for ever ! Sweet friends , what shall become of Faustus , being in hell for ever ? SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet , Faustus , call on God .
On God , whom Faustus hath abjured ! on God , whom Faustushath blasphemed ! O my God , I would weep ! but the devil draws inmy tears. Gush forth blood , instead of tears ! yea , life and soul ! O , he stays my tongue ! I would lift up my hands ; but see , theyhold 'em , they hold 'em ? ( ' ? ' sic )
Who , Faustus ?
Why , Lucifer and Mephistophilis. O gentlemen , I gavethem my soul for my cunning !
O , God forbid !
God forbade it , indeed ; but Faustus hath done it : forthe vain pleasure of four-and-twenty years hath Faustus losteternal joy and felicity. I writ them a bill with mine own blood : the date is expired ; this is the time , and he will fetch me.FIRST SCHOLAR. Why did not Faustus tell us of this before , that divines might have prayed for thee ?
Oft have I thought to have done so ; but the devilthreatened to tear me in pieces , if I named God , to fetch mebody and soul , if I once gave ear to divinity : and now 't is [ 250 ] too late. Gentlemen , away , lest you perish with me.SECOND SCHOLAR. O , what may we do to save Faustus ?
Talk not of me , but save yourselves , and depart.THIRD SCHOLAR. God will strengthen me ; I will stay with Faustus.FIRST SCHOLAR. Tempt not God , sweet friend ; but let us into thenext room , and pray for him .
Ay , pray for me , pray for me ; and what noise soeveryou hear , come not unto me , for nothing can rescue me.SECOND SCHOLAR. Pray thou , and we will pray that God may have mercyupon thee .
Gentlemen , farewell : if I live till morning , I 'll visityou ; if not , Faustus is gone to hell .
Faustus , farewell. [ Exeunt SCHOLARS . ]
Ay , Faustus , now thou hast no hope of heaven ; Therefore despair ; think only upon hell , For that must be thy mansion , there to dwell .
O thou bewitching fiend , 't was thy temptationHath robb 'd me of eternal happiness !
O , I have seen enough to torture me ! EVIL ANGEL. Nay , thou must feel them , taste the smart of all : He that loves pleasure must for pleasure fall : And so I leave thee , Faustus , till anon ; Then wilt thou tumble in confusion. [ Exit. Hell disappears. -- The clock strikes eleven . ]
Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight , And burned is Apollo 's laurel-bough , That sometime grew within this learned man.Faustus is gone : regard his hellish fall , Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise , Only to wonder at unlawful things , Whose deepness doth entice such forward witsTo practise more than heavenly power permits. [ Exit. ] Terminat hora diem ; terminat auctor opus .
When I behold the heavens , & c. : Old eds. ( that is , 4tos 1616 , 1624 , 1631 ) thus ; '' This will I keepe , as chary as my life. [ Exeunt. : Enter WAGNER solus .
Learned FaustusTo know the secrets of AstronomyGrauen in the booke of Joues high firmament , Did mount himselfe to scale Olympus top , Being seated in a chariot burning bright , Drawne by the strength of yoaky [ 2to 1624 `` yoaked '' : Dragons necks , He now is gone to proue Cosmography , And as I gesse will first arriue at Rome , To see the Pope and manner of his Court ; And take some part of holy Peters feast , That to [ 2tos 1624 , 1631 , `` on '' : this day is highly solemnized.Exit WAGNER.Enter FAUSTUS in his Study , and MEPHISTOPHILIS .
When I behold the heauens , '' & c.The lines which I have here omitted belong to a subsequent partof the play , where they will be found with considerable additions , and are rightly assigned to the CHORUS. ( As given in the presentplace by the 4tos 1616 , 1624 , 1631 , these lines exhibit the textof the earlier FAUSTUS ; see p. 90 , sec. col. ) It would seem thatsomething was intended to intervene here between the exit of Faustusand Mephistophilis , and their re-appearance on the stage : compare , however , the preceding play , p. 88 , first col.p. 90 , sec. col. ( Doctor Faustus , from the quarto of 1604 ) : '' FAUSTUS. Great thanks , mighty Lucifer ! This will I keep as chary as my life .
Farewell , Faustus , and think on the devil .
Farewell , great Lucifer. [ Exeunt LUCIFER and BELZEBUB. : Come , Mephistophilis. [ Exeunt. : Enter CHORUS .
Learned Faustus , To know the secrets of astronomyGraven in the book of Jove 's high firmament , Did mount himself to scale Olympus ' top , Being seated in a chariot burning bright , Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons ' necks.He now is gone to prove cosmography , And , as I guess , will first arrive at Rome , To see the Pope and manner of his court , And take some part of holy Peter 's feast , That to this day is highly solemniz'd. [ Exit. : Enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS .
Having now , my good Mephistophilis , Pass 'd with delight the stately town of Trier , '' etc.p. 88 , first col. ( Doctor Faustus , from the quarto of 1604 ) : This part of the play does not have any relevance to charactersleaving the stage and re-entering.Perhaps the editor meant p. 93 , first column.p. 93 , first col. ( Doctor Faustus , from the quarto of 1604 ) : '' RALPH. O , brave , Robin ! shall I have Nan Spit , and to mineown use ? On that condition I 'll feed thy devil with horse-bread as long as he lives , of free cost .
No more , sweet Ralph : let 's go and make clean ourboots , which lie foul upon our hands , and then to our conjuringin the devil 's name. [ Exeunt. : Enter ROBIN and RALPH with a silver goblet .
Come , Ralph : did not I tell thee , we were for evermade by this Doctor Faustus ' book ? ecce , signum ! here 's asimple purchase for horse-keepers : our horses shall eatno hay as long as this lasts .
111. ( this play ) : '' Enter WAGNER and CLOWN .
132 , first column. ( this play ) : '' MEPHIST. And , this gloomy night , Here , in this room , will wretched Faustus be .
101 , sec. col. ( Doctor Faustus , from the quarto of 1604 ) : '' Ah , half the hour is past ! 'twill all be past anonO God , If thou wilt not have mercy on my soul , Yet for Christ 's sake , whose blood hath ransom 'd me , Impose some end to my incessant pain ; '' etc. ] [ Footnote 263 : at last : So 4to 1616. -- 2tos 1624 , 1631 , `` at THE last. '' ] [ Footnote 264 : Enter Scholars : Here , of course , a change of scene issupposed. ( This is not in the earlier play. ) ] [ Footnote 265 : heaven : So 4to 1616. -- 2tos 1624 , 1631 , `` heauens. '' ] [ Footnote 266 : devils ... . have : So 4to 1616. -- 2tos 1624 , 1631 , '' DIUELL ... . HATH. '' ] [ Footnote 267 : self : So 4to 1616. -- 2tos 1624 , 1631 , `` same. '' ] End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Dr. Faustus , by Christopher Marlowe*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DR. FAUSTUS ******** This file should be named 811-8.txt or 811-8.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm , including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation , how to help produce our new eBooks , and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jew of Malta , by Christopher MarloweThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it , give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
Posting Date : July 26 , 2008 [ EBook # 901 ] Release Date : May 1997
Barabas , thy ships are safe , Riding in Malta-road ; and all the merchantsWith other merchandise are safe arriv 'd , And have sent me to know whether yourselfWill come and custom them. [ 22 ]
The ships are safe thou say'st , and richly fraught ?
They are .
Why , then , go bid them come ashore , And bring with them their bills of entry : I hope our credit in the custom-houseWill serve as well as I were present there.Go send 'em threescore camels , thirty mules , And twenty waggons , to bring up the ware.But art thou master in a ship of mine , And is thy credit not enough for that ?
The very custom barely comes to moreThan many merchants of the town are worth , And therefore far exceeds my credit , sir .
Go tell 'em the Jew of Malta sent thee , man : Tush , who amongst 'em knows not Barabas ?
I go .
So , then , there 's somewhat come. -- Sirrah , which of my ships art thou master of ?
Of the Speranza , sir .
And saw'st thou notMine argosy at Alexandria ? Thou couldst not come from Egypt , or by Caire , But at the entry there into the sea , Where Nilus pays his tribute to the main , Thou needs must sail by Alexandria .
I neither saw them , nor inquir 'd of them : But this we heard some of our seamen say , They wonder 'd how you durst with so much wealthTrust such a crazed vessel , and so far .
Tush , they are wise ! I know her and her strength.But [ 23 ] go , go thou thy ways , discharge thy ship , And bid my factor bring his loading in. [ Exit MERCHANT. ] And yet I wonder at this argosy.Enter a Second MERCHANT.SECOND MERCHANT. Thine argosy from Alexandria , Know , Barabas , doth ride in Malta-road , Laden with riches , and exceeding storeOf Persian silks , of gold , and orient pearl .
How chance you came not with those other shipsThat sail 'd by Egypt ? SECOND MERCHANT. Sir , we saw 'em not .
Belike they coasted round by Candy-shoreAbout their oils or other businesses.But 't was ill done of you to come so farWithout the aid or conduct of their ships.SECOND MERCHANT. Sir , we were wafted by a Spanish fleet , That never left us till within a league , That had the galleys of the Turk in chase .
O , they were going up to Sicily.Well , go , And bid the merchants and my men despatch , And come ashore , and see the fraught [ 24 ] discharg'd.SECOND MERCHANT. I go. [ Exit . ]
Why , how now , countrymen ! Why flock you thus to me in multitudes ? What accident 's betided to the Jews ? FIRST JEW. A fleet of warlike galleys , Barabas , Are come from Turkey , and lie in our road : And they this day sit in the council-houseTo entertain them and their embassy .
Why , let 'em come , so they come not to war ; Or let 'em war , so we be conquerors. -- Nay , let 'em combat , conquer , and kill all , So they spare me , my daughter , and my wealth. [ Aside. ] FIRST JEW. Were it for confirmation of a league , They would not come in warlike manner thus.SECOND JEW. I fear their coming will afflict us all .
Fond [ 27 ] men , what dream you of their multitudes ? What need they treat of peace that are in league ? The Turks and those of Malta are in league : Tut , tut , there is some other matter in't.FIRST JEW. Why , Barabas , they come for peace or war .
Haply for neither , but to pass along , Towards Venice , by the Adriatic sea , With whom they have attempted many times , But never could effect their stratagem.THIRD JEW. And very wisely said ; it may be so.SECOND JEW. But there 's a meeting in the senate-house , And all the Jews in Malta must be there .
Hum , -- all the Jews in Malta must be there ! Ay , like enough : why , then , let every manProvide him , and be there for fashion-sake.If any thing shall there concern our state , Assure yourselves I 'll look -- unto myself. [ Aside. ] [ 28 ] FIRST JEW. I know you will. -- Well , brethren , let us go.SECOND JEW. Let 's take our leaves. -- Farewell , good Barabas .
[ 29 ] Farewell , Zaareth ; farewell , Temainte. [ Exeunt JEWS. ] And , Barabas , now search this secret out ; Summon thy senses , call thy wits together : These silly men mistake the matter clean.Long to the Turk did Malta contribute ; Which tribute all in policy , I fear , The Turk has [ 30 ] let increase to such a sumAs all the wealth of Malta can not pay ; And now by that advantage thinks , belike , To seize upon the town ; ay , that he seeks.Howe'er the world go , I 'll make sure for one , And seek in time to intercept the worst , Warily guarding that which I ha ' got : Ego mihimet sum semper proximus : [ 31 ] Why , let 'em enter , let 'em take the town. [ Exit. ] [ 32 ] Enter FERNEZE governor of Malta , KNIGHTS , and OFFICERS ; met by CALYMATH , and BASSOES of the TURK .
Now , bassoes , [ 33 ] what demand you at our hands ? FIRST BASSO. Know , knights of Malta , that we came from Rhodes , ] From Cyprus , Candy , and those other islesThat lie betwixt the Mediterranean seas .
What 's Cyprus , Candy , and those other islesTo us or Malta ? what at our hands demand ye ?
The ten years ' tribute that remains unpaid .
Alas , my lord , the sum is over-great ! I hope your highness will consider us .
I wish , grave governor , [ 34 ] 'twere in my powerTo favour you ; but 't is my father 's cause , Wherein I may not , nay , I dare not dally .
Then give us leave , great Selim Calymath .
Stand all aside , [ 35 ] and let the knights determine ; And send to keep our galleys under sail , For happily [ 36 ] we shall not tarry here. -- Now , governor , how are you resolv 'd ?
Thus ; since your hard conditions are suchThat you will needs have ten years ' tribute past , We may have time to make collectionAmongst the inhabitants of Malta for't.FIRST BASSO. That 's more than is in our commission .
What , Callapine ! a little courtesy : Let 's know their time ; perhaps it is not long ; And 't is more kingly to obtain by peaceThan to enforce conditions by constraint. -- What respite ask you , governor ?
But a month .
We grant a month ; but see you keep your promise.Now launch our galleys back again to sea , Where we 'll attend the respite you have ta'en , And for the money send our messenger.Farewell , great governor , and brave knights of Malta .
And all good fortune wait on Calymath ! [ Exeunt CALYMATH and BASSOES. ] Go one and call those Jews of Malta hither : Were they not summon 'd to appear to-day ? FIRST OFFICER. They were , my lord ; and here they come.Enter BARABAS and three JEWS.FIRST KNIGHT. Have you determin 'd what to say to them ?
Yes ; give me leave : -- and , Hebrews , now come near. ] From the Emperor of Turkey is arriv'dGreat Selim Calymath , his highness ' son , To levy of us ten years ' tribute past : Now , then , here know that it concerneth us .
Then , good my lord , to keep your quiet still , Your lordship shall do well to let them have it .
Soft , Barabas ! there 's more 'longs to't than so.To what this ten years ' tribute will amount , That we have cast , but can not compass itBy reason of the wars , that robb 'd our store ; And therefore are we to request your aid .
Alas , my lord , we are no soldiers ! And what 's our aid against so great a prince ? FIRST KNIGHT. Tut , Jew , we know thou art no soldier : Thou art a merchant and a money 'd man , And 't is thy money , Barabas , we seek .
How , my lord ! my money !
Thine and the rest ; For , to be short , amongst you't must be had.FIRST JEW. Alas , my lord , the most of us are poor !
Then let the rich increase your portions .
Are strangers with your tribute to be tax 'd ? SECOND KNIGHT. Have strangers leave with us to get their wealth ? Then let them with us contribute .
How ! equally ?
No , Jew , like infidels ; For through our sufferance of your hateful lives , Who stand accursed in the sight of heaven , These taxes and afflictions are befall'n , And therefore thus we are determined. -- Read there the articles of our decrees .
[ 37 ] [ reads ] FIRST , THE TRIBUTE-MONEY OF THE TURKSSHALL ALL BE LEVIED AMONGST THE JEWS , AND EACH OF THEM TO PAYONE HALF OF HIS ESTATE .
How ! half his estate ! -- I hope you mean not mine. [ Aside . ]
Read on .
[ reads ] SECONDLY , HE THAT DENIES [ 38 ] TO PAY , SHALLSTRAIGHT-BECOME A CHRISTIAN .
How ! a Christian ! -- Hum , -- what 's here to do ? [ Aside . ]
[ reads ] LASTLY , HE THAT DENIES THIS , SHALL ABSOLUTELYLOSE ALL HE HAS.THREE JEWS. O my lord , we will give half !
O earth-mettled villains , and no Hebrews born ! And will you basely thus submit yourselvesTo leave your goods to their arbitrement ?
Why , Barabas , wilt thou be christened ?
No , governor , I will be no convertite. [ 39 ]
Then pay thy half .
Why , know you what you did by this device ? Half of my substance is a city 's wealth.Governor , it was not got so easily ; Nor will I part so slightly therewithal .
Sir , half is the penalty of our decree ; Either pay that , or we will seize on all .
Corpo di Dio ! stay : you shall have half ; Let me be us 'd but as my brethren are .
No , Jew , thou hast denied the articles , And now it can not be recall'd. [ Exeunt OFFICERS , on a sign from FERNEZE ]
Will you , then , steal my goods ? Is theft the ground of your religion ?
No , Jew ; we take particularly thine , To save the ruin of a multitude : And better one want for a common good , Than many perish for a private man : Yet , Barabas , we will not banish thee , But here in Malta , where thou gott'st thy wealth , Live still ; and , if thou canst , get more .
Christians , what or how can I multiply ? Of naught is nothing made.FIRST KNIGHT. From naught at first thou cam'st to little wealth , ] From little unto more , from more to most : If your first curse fall heavy on thy head , And make thee poor and scorn 'd of all the world , 'T is not our fault , but thy inherent sin .
What , bring you Scripture to confirm your wrongs ? Preach me not out of my possessions.Some Jews are wicked , as all Christians are : But say the tribe that I descended ofWere all in general cast away for sin , Shall I be tried by their transgression ? The man that dealeth righteously shall live ; And which of you can charge me otherwise ?
Out , wretched Barabas ! Sham'st thou not thus to justify thyself , As if we knew not thy profession ? If thou rely upon thy righteousness , Be patient , and thy riches will increase.Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness ; And covetousness , O , 't is a monstrous sin !
Ay , but theft is worse : tush ! take not from me , then , For that is theft ; and , if you rob me thus , I must be forc 'd to steal , and compass more.FIRST KNIGHT. Grave governor , list not to his exclaims : Convert his mansion to a nunnery ; His house will harbour many holy nuns .
It shall be so.Re-enter OFFICERS.Now , officers , have you done ? FIRST OFFICER. Ay , my lord , we have seiz 'd upon the goodsAnd wares of Barabas , which , being valu 'd , Amount to more than all the wealth in Malta : And of the other we have seized half .
Then we 'll take [ 40 ] order for the residue .
Well , then , my lord , say , are you satisfied ? You have my goods , my money , and my wealth , My ships , my store , and all that I enjoy 'd ; And , having all , you can request no more , Unless your unrelenting flinty heartsSuppress all pity in your stony breasts , And now shall move you to bereave my life .
No , Barabas ; to stain our hands with bloodIs far from us and our profession .
Why , I esteem the injury far less , To take the lives of miserable menThan be the causers of their misery.You have my wealth , the labour of my life , The comfort of mine age , my children 's hope ; And therefore ne'er distinguish of the wrong .
Content thee , Barabas ; thou hast naught but right .
Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong : But take it to you , i'the devil 's name !
Come , let us in , and gather of these goodsThe money for this tribute of the Turk.FIRST KNIGHT. 'T is necessary that be look 'd unto ; For , if we break our day , we break the league , And that will prove but simple policy. [ Exeunt all except BARABAS and the three JEWS . ]
Ay , policy ! that 's their profession , And not simplicity , as they suggest. -- The plagues of Egypt , and the curse of heaven , Earth 's barrenness , and all men 's hatred , Inflict upon them , thou great Primus Motor ! And here upon my knees , striking the earth , I ban their souls to everlasting pains , And extreme tortures of the fiery deep , That thus have dealt with me in my distress ! FIRST JEW. O , yet be patient , gentle Barabas !
O silly brethren , born to see this day , Why stand you thus unmov 'd with my laments ? Why weep you not to think upon my wrongs ? Why pine not I , and die in this distress ? FIRST JEW. Why , Barabas , as hardly can we brookThe cruel handling of ourselves in this : Thou seest they have taken half our goods .
Why did you yield to their extortion ? You were a multitude , and I but one ; And of me only have they taken all.FIRST JEW. Yet , brother Barabas , remember Job .
What tell you me of Job ? I wot his wealthWas written thus ; he had seven thousand sheep , Three thousand camels , and two hundred yokeOf labouring oxen , and five hundredShe-asses : but for every one of those , Had they been valu 'd at indifferent rate , I had at home , and in mine argosy , And other ships that came from Egypt last , As much as would have bought his beasts and him , And yet have kept enough to live upon ; So that not he , but I , may curse the day , Thy fatal birth-day , forlorn Barabas ; And henceforth wish for an eternal night , That clouds of darkness may inclose my flesh , And hide these extreme sorrows from mine eyes ; For only I have toil 'd to inherit hereThe months of vanity , and loss of time , And painful nights , have been appointed me.SECOND JEW. Good Barabas , be patient .
Ay , I pray , leave me in my patience. You , thatWere ne'er possess 'd of wealth , are pleas 'd with want ; But give him liberty at least to mourn , That in a field , amidst his enemies , Doth see his soldiers slain , himself disarm 'd , And knows no means of his recovery : Ay , let me sorrow for this sudden chance ; 'T is in the trouble of my spirit I speak : Great injuries are not so soon forgot.FIRST JEW. Come , let us leave him ; in his ireful moodOur words will but increase his ecstasy. [ 41 ] SECOND JEW. On , then : but , trust me , 't is a miseryTo see a man in such affliction. -- Farewell , Barabas .
Ay , fare you well. [ Exeunt three JEWS. ] [ 42 ] See the simplicity of these base slaves , Who , for the villains have no wit themselves , Think me to be a senseless lump of clay , That will with every water wash to dirt ! No , Barabas is born to better chance , And fram 'd of finer mould than common men , That measure naught but by the present time.A reaching thought will search his deepest wits , And cast with cunning for the time to come ; For evils are apt to happen every day.Enter ABIGAIL.But whither wends my beauteous Abigail ? O , what has made my lovely daughter sad ? What , woman ! moan not for a little loss ; Thy father has enough in store for thee .
Nor for myself , but aged Barabas , Father , for thee lamenteth Abigail : But I will learn to leave these fruitless tears ; And , urg 'd thereto with my afflictions , With fierce exclaims run to the senate-house , And in the senate reprehend them all , And rent their hearts with tearing of my hair , Till they reduce [ 43 ] the wrongs done to my father .
No , Abigail ; things past recoveryAre hardly cur 'd with exclamations : Be silent , daughter ; sufferance breeds ease , And time may yield us an occasion , Which on the sudden can not serve the turn.Besides , my girl , think me not all so fond [ 44 ] As negligently to forgo so muchWithout provision for thyself and me : Ten thousand portagues , [ 45 ] besides great pearls , Rich costly jewels , and stones infinite , Fearing the worst of this before it fell , I closely hid .
Where , father ?
In my house , my girl .
Then shall they ne'er be seen of Barabas ; For they have seiz 'd upon thy house and wares .
But they will give me leave once more , I trow , To go into my house .
That may they not ; For there I left the governor placing nuns , Displacing me ; and of thy house they meanTo make a nunnery , where none but their own sect [ 46 ] Must enter in ; men generally barr 'd .
My gold , my gold , and all my wealth is gone ! -- You partial heavens , have I deserv 'd this plague ? What , will you thus oppose me , luckless stars , To make me desperate in my poverty ? And , knowing me impatient in distress , Think me so mad as I will hang myself , That I may vanish o'er the earth in air , And leave no memory that e'er I was ? No , I will live ; nor loathe I this my life : And , since you leave me in the ocean thusTo sink or swim , and put me to my shifts , I 'll rouse my senses , and awake myself. -- Daughter , I have it : thou perceiv'st the plightWherein these Christians have oppressed me : Be rul 'd by me , for in extremityWe ought to make bar of no policy .
Father , whate'er it be , to injure themThat have so manifestly wronged us , What will not Abigail attempt ?
Why , so.Then thus : thou told'st me they have turn 'd my houseInto a nunnery , and some nuns are there ?
I did .
Then , Abigail , there must my girlEntreat the abbess to be entertain 'd .
How ! as a nun ?
Ay , daughter ; for religionHides many mischiefs from suspicion .
Ay , but , father , they will suspect me there .
Let 'em suspect ; but be thou so preciseAs they may think it done of holiness : Entreat 'em fair , and give them friendly speech , And seem to them as if thy sins were great , Till thou hast gotten to be entertain 'd .
Thus , father , shall I much dissemble .
Tush ! As good dissemble that thou never mean'st , As first mean truth and then dissemble it : A counterfeit profession is betterThan unseen hypocrisy .
Well , father , say I be entertain 'd , What then shall follow ?
This shall follow then.There have I hid , close underneath the plankThat runs along the upper-chamber floor , The gold and jewels which I kept for thee : -- But here they come : be cunning , Abigail .
Then , father , go with me .
No , Abigail , in thisIt is not necessary I be seen ; For I will seem offended with thee for't : Be close , my girl , for this must fetch my gold. [ They retire. ] Enter FRIAR JACOMO , [ 47 ] FRIAR BARNARDINE , ABBESS , and a NUN.FRIAR JACOMO. Sisters , We now are almost at the new-made nunnery .
[ 48 ] The better ; for we love not to be seen : 'T is thirty winters long since some of usDid stray so far amongst the multitude.FRIAR JACOMO. But , madam , this houseAnd waters of this new-made nunneryWill much delight you .
It may be so. -- But who comes here ? [ ABIGAIL comes forward . ]
Grave abbess , and you happy virgins ' guide , Pity the state of a distressed maid !
What art thou , daughter ?
The hopeless daughter of a hapless Jew , The Jew of Malta , wretched Barabas , Sometimes [ 49 ] the owner of a goodly house , Which they have now turn 'd to a nunnery .
Well , daughter , say , what is thy suit with us ?
Fearing the afflictions which my father feelsProceed from sin or want of faith in us , I 'd pass away my life in penitence , And be a novice in your nunnery , To make atonement for my labouring soul.FRIAR JACOMO. No doubt , brother , but this proceedeth ofthe spirit.FRIAR BARNARDINE.Ay , and of a moving spirit too , brother : but come , Let us entreat she may be entertain 'd .
Well , daughter , we admit you for a nun .
First let me as a novice learn to frameMy solitary life to your strait laws , And let me lodge where I was wont to lie : I do not doubt , by your divine preceptsAnd mine own industry , but to profit much .
As much , I hope , as all I hid is worth. [ Aside . ]
Come , daughter , follow us .
[ coming forward ] Why , how now , Abigail ! What mak'st thou 'mongst these hateful Christians ? FRIAR JACOMO. Hinder her not , thou man of little faith , For she has mortified herself .
How ! mortified ! FRIAR JACOMO. And is admitted to the sisterhood .
Child of perdition , and thy father 's shame ! What wilt thou do among these hateful fiends ? I charge thee on my blessing that thou leaveThese devils and their damned heresy !
Father , forgive me -- [ 50 ]
Nay , back , Abigail , And think upon the jewels and the gold ; The board is marked thus that covers it. -- [ Aside to ABIGAIL in a whisper. ] Away , accursed , from thy father 's sight ! FRIAR JACOMO. Barabas , although thou art in misbelief , And wilt not see thine own afflictions , Yet let thy daughter be no longer blind .
Blind friar , I reck not thy persuasions , -- The board is marked thus [ 51 ] that covers it -- [ Aside to ABIGAIL in a whisper. ] For I had rather die than see her thus. -- Wilt thou forsake me too in my distress , Seduced daughter ? -- Go , forget not. -- [ 52 ] [ Aside to her in a whisper. ] Becomes it Jews to be so credulous ? -- To-morrow early I 'll be at the door. -- [ Aside to her in a whisper. ] No , come not at me ; if thou wilt be damn 'd , Forget me , see me not ; and so , be gone ! -- Farewell ; remember to-morrow morning. -- [ Aside to her in a whisper. ] Out , out , thou wretch ! [ Exit , on one side , BARABAS. Exeunt , on the other side , FRIARS , ABBESS , NUN , and ABIGAIL : and , as they are goingout , ] Enter MATHIAS .
Who 's this ? fair Abigail , the rich Jew 's daughter , Become a nun ! her father 's sudden fallHas humbled her , and brought her down to this : Tut , she were fitter for a tale of love , Than to be tired out with orisons ; And better would she far become a bed , Embraced in a friendly lover 's arms , Than rise at midnight to a solemn mass.Enter LODOWICK .
Why , how now , Don Mathias ! in a dump ?
Believe me , noble Lodowick , I have seenThe strangest sight , in my opinion , That ever I beheld .
What was't , I prithee ?
A fair young maid , scarce fourteen years of age , The sweetest flower in Cytherea 's field , Cropt from the pleasures of the fruitful earth , And strangely metamorphos 'd [ to a ] nun .
But say , what was she ?
Why , the rich Jew 's daughter .
What , Barabas , whose goods were lately seiz 'd ? Is she so fair ?
And matchless beautiful , As , had you seen her , 'twould have mov 'd your heart , Though countermin 'd with walls of brass , to love , Or , at the least , to pity .
An if she be so fair as you report , 'Twere time well spent to go and visit her : How say you ? shall we ?
I must and will , sir ; there 's no remedy .
And so will I too , or it shall go hard.Farewell , Mathias .
Farewell , Lodowick. [ Exeunt severally. ] ACT II.Enter BARABAS , with a light. [ 53 ]
Thus , like the sad-presaging raven , that tollsThe sick man 's passport in her hollow beak , [ 54 ] And in the shadow of the silent nightDoth shake contagion from her sable wings , Vex 'd and tormented runs poor BarabasWith fatal curses towards these Christians.The incertain pleasures of swift-footed timeHave ta'en their flight , and left me in despair ; And of my former riches rests no moreBut bare remembrance ; like a soldier 's scar , That has no further comfort for his maim. -- O Thou , that with a fiery pillar ledd'stThe sons of Israel through the dismal shades , Light Abraham 's offspring ; and direct the handOf Abigail this night ! or let the dayTurn to eternal darkness after this ! -- No sleep can fasten on my watchful eyes , Nor quiet enter my distemper 'd thoughts , Till I have answer of my Abigail.Enter ABIGAIL above .
Now have I happily espied a timeTo search the plank my father did appoint ; And here , behold , unseen , where I have foundThe gold , the pearls , and jewels , which he hid .
Now I remember those old women 's words , Who in my wealth would tell me winter 's tales , And speak of spirits and ghosts that glide by nightAbout the place where treasure hath been hid : And now methinks that I am one of those ; For , whilst I live , here lives my soul 's sole hope , And , when I die , here shall my spirit walk .
Now that my father 's fortune were so goodAs but to be about this happy place ! 'T is not so happy : yet , when we parted last , He said he would attend me in the morn.Then , gentle Sleep , where'er his body rests , Give charge to Morpheus that he may dreamA golden dream , and of [ 55 ] the sudden wake , [ 56 ] Come and receive the treasure I have found .
Bueno para todos mi ganado no era : [ 57 ] As good go on , as sit so sadly thus. -- But stay : what star shines yonder in the east ? [ 58 ] The loadstar of my life , if Abigail. -- Who 's there ?
Who 's that ?
Peace , Abigail ! 't is I .
Then , father , here receive thy happiness .
Hast thou't ?
Here. [ throws down bags ] Hast thou't ? There 's more , and more , and more .
O my girl , My gold , my fortune , my felicity , Strength to my soul , death to mine enemy ; Welcome the first beginner of my bliss ! O Abigail , Abigail , that I had thee here too ! Then my desires were fully satisfied : But I will practice thy enlargement thence : O girl ! O gold ! O beauty ! O my bliss ! [ Hugs the bags . ]
Father , it draweth towards midnight now , And 'bout this time the nuns begin to wake ; To shun suspicion , therefore , let us part .
Farewell , my joy , and by my fingers takeA kiss from him that sends it from his soul. [ Exit ABIGAIL above. ] Now , Phoebus , ope the eye-lids of the day.And , for the raven , wake the morning lark , That I may hover with her in the air , Singing o'er these , as she does o'er her young.Hermoso placer de los dineros. [ 59 ] [ Exit. ] Enter FERNEZE , [ 60 ] MARTIN DEL BOSCO , KNIGHTS , and OFFICERS .
Now , captain , tell us whither thou art bound ? Whence is thy ship that anchors in our road ? And why thou cam'st ashore without our leave ? MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Governor of Malta , hither am I bound ; My ship , the Flying Dragon , is of Spain , And so am I ; Del Bosco is my name , Vice-admiral unto the Catholic King.FIRST KNIGHT. 'T is true , my lord ; therefore entreat [ 61 ] him well.MARTIN DEL BOSCO.Our fraught is Grecians , Turks , and Afric Moors ; For late upon the coast of Corsica , Because we vail 'd not [ 62 ] to the Turkish [ 63 ] fleet , Their creeping galleys had us in the chase : But suddenly the wind began to rise , And then we luff 'd and tack 'd , [ 64 ] and fought at ease : Some have we fir 'd , and many have we sunk ; But one amongst the rest became our prize : The captain 's slain ; the rest remain our slaves , Of whom we would make sale in Malta here .
Martin del Bosco , I have heard of thee : Welcome to Malta , and to all of us ! But to admit a sale of these thy Turks , We may not , nay , we dare not give consent , By reason of a tributary league.FIRST KNIGHT. Del Bosco , as thou lov'st and honour'st us , Persuade our governor against the Turk : This truce we have is but in hope of gold , And with that sum he craves might we wage war.MARTIN DEL BOSCO. Will knights of Malta be in league with Turks , And buy it basely too for sums of gold ? My lord , remember that , to Europe 's shame , The Christian isle of Rhodes , from whence you came , Was lately lost , and you were stated [ 65 ] hereTo be at deadly enmity with Turks .
Captain , we know it ; but our force is small.MARTIN DEL BOSCO. What is the sum that Calymath requires ?
A hundred thousand crowns.MARTIN DEL BOSCO. My lord and king hath title to this isle , And he means quickly to expel you hence ; Therefore be rul 'd by me , and keep the gold : I 'll write unto his majesty for aid , And not depart until I see you free .
On this condition shall thy Turks be sold. -- Go , officers , and set them straight in show. -- [ Exeunt OFFICERS. ] Bosco , thou shalt be Malta 's general ; We and our warlike knights will follow theeAgainst these barbarous misbelieving Turks.MARTIN DEL BOSCO. So shall you imitate those you succeed ; For , when their hideous force environ 'd Rhodes , Small though the number was that kept the town , They fought it out , and not a man surviv'dTo bring the hapless news to Christendom .
So will we fight it out : come , let 's away.Proud daring Calymath , instead of gold , We 'll send thee bullets wrapt in smoke and fire : Claim tribute where thou wilt , we are resolv 'd , -- Honour is bought with blood , and not with gold. [ Exeunt. ] Enter OFFICERS , [ 66 ] with ITHAMORE and other SLAVES.FIRST OFFICER. This is the market-place ; here let 'em stand : Fear not their sale , for they 'll be quickly bought.SECOND OFFICER. Every one 's price is written on his back , And so much must they yield , or not be sold.FIRST OFFICER.Here comes the Jew : had not his goods been seiz 'd , He 'd give us present money for them all.Enter BARABAS .
I hear the wealthy Jew walked this way : I 'll seek him out , and so insinuate , That I may have a sight of Abigail , For Don Mathias tells me she is fair .
Now will I shew myself to have more of the serpent thanthe dove ; that is , more knave than fool. [ Aside . ]
Yond ' walks the Jew : now for fair Abigail .
Ay , ay , no doubt but she 's at your command. [ Aside . ]
Barabas , thou know'st I am the governor 's son .
I would you were his father too , sir ! that 's all the harmI wish you. -- The slave looks like a hog 's cheek new-singed. [ Aside . ]
Whither walk'st thou , Barabas ?
No further : 't is a custom held with us , That when we speak with Gentiles like to you , We turn into [ 68 ] the air to purge ourselves ; For unto us the promise doth belong .
Well , Barabas , canst help me to a diamond ?
O , sir , your father had my diamonds : Yet I have one left that will serve your turn. -- I mean my daughter ; but , ere he shall have her , I 'll sacrifice her on a pile of wood : I ha ' the poison of the city [ 69 ] for him , And the white leprosy. [ Aside . ]
What sparkle does it give without a foil ?
The diamond that I talk of ne'er was foil 'd : -- But , when he touches it , it will be foil'd. -- [ 70 ] [ Aside. ] Lord Lodowick , it sparkles bright and fair .
Is it square or pointed ? pray , let me know .
Pointed it is , good sir , -- but not for you. [ Aside . ]
I like it much the better .
So do I too .
How shews it by night ?
Outshines Cynthia 's rays : -- You 'll like it better far o ' nights than days. [ Aside . ]
And what 's the price ?
Your life , an if you have it [ Aside ] . -- O my lord , We will not jar about the price : come to my house , And I will give't your honour -- with a vengeance. [ Aside . ]
No , Barabas , I will deserve it first .
Good sir , Your father has deserv 'd it at my hands , Who , of mere charity and Christian ruth , To bring me to religious purity , And , as it were , in catechising sort , To make me mindful of my mortal sins , Against my will , and whether I would or no , Seiz 'd all I had , and thrust me out o ' doors , And made my house a place for nuns most chaste .
No doubt your soul shall reap the fruit of it .
Ay , but , my lord , the harvest is far off : And yet I know the prayers of those nunsAnd holy friars , having money for their pains , Are wondrous ; -- and indeed do no man good ; -- [ Aside. ] And , seeing they are not idle , but still doing , 'T is likely they in time may reap some fruit , I mean , in fullness of perfection .
Good Barabas , glance not at our holy nuns .
No , but I do it through a burning zeal , -- Hoping ere long to set the house a-fire ; For , though they do a while increase and multiply , I 'll have a saying to that nunnery. -- [ 71 ] [ Aside. ] As for the diamond , sir , I told you of , Come home , and there 's no price shall make us part , Even for your honourable father 's sake , -- It shall go hard but I will see your death. -- [ Aside. ] But now I must be gone to buy a slave .
And , Barabas , I 'll bear thee company .
Come , then ; here 's the market-place. -- What 's the price of this slave ? two hundred crowns ! do the Turksweigh so much ? FIRST OFFICER. Sir , that 's his price .
What , can he steal , that you demand so much ? Belike he has some new trick for a purse ; An if he has , he is worth three hundred plates , [ 72 ] So that , being bought , the town-seal might be gotTo keep him for his life-time from the gallows : The sessions-day is critical to thieves , And few or none scape but by being purg 'd .
Rat'st thou this Moor but at two hundred plates ? FIRST OFFICER. No more , my lord .
Why should this Turk be dearer than that Moor ? FIRST OFFICER. Because he is young , and has more qualities .
What , hast the philosopher 's stone ? an thou hast , breakmy head with it , I 'll forgive thee .
[ 73 ] No , sir ; I can cut and shave .
Let me see , sirrah ; are you not an old shaver ?
Alas , sir , I am a very youth !
A youth ! I 'll buy you , and marry you to Lady Vanity , [ 74 ] if you do well .
I will serve you , sir .
Some wicked trick or other : it may be , under colourof shaving , thou'lt cut my throat for my goods. Tell me , hast thou thy health well ?
Ay , passing well .
So much the worse : I must have one that 's sickly , an'tbe but for sparing victuals : 't is not a stone of beef a-daywill maintain you in these chops. -- Let me see one that'ssomewhat leaner.FIRST OFFICER. Here 's a leaner ; how like you him ?
Where wast thou born ?
In Thrace ; brought up in Arabia .
So much the better ; thou art for my turn.An hundred crowns ? I 'll have him ; there 's the coin. [ Gives money. ] FIRST OFFICER. Then mark him , sir , and take him hence .
Ay , mark him , you were best ; for this is heThat by my help shall do much villany. -- [ Aside. ] My lord , farewell. -- Come , sirrah ; you are mine. -- As for the diamond , it shall be yours : I pray , sir , be no stranger at my house ; All that I have shall be at your command.Enter MATHIAS and KATHARINE. [ 75 ]
What make the Jew and Lodowick so private ? I fear me 't is about fair Abigail. [ Aside . ]
[ to LODOWICK. ] Yonder comes Don Mathias ; let us stay : [ 76 ] He loves my daughter , and she holds him dear ; But I have sworn to frustrate both their hopes , And be reveng 'd upon the -- governor. [ Aside. ] [ Exit LODOWICK . ]
This Moor is comeliest , is he not ? speak , son .
No , this is the better , mother , view this well .
Seem not to know me here before your mother , Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand : When you have brought her home , come to my house ; Think of me as thy father : son , farewell .
But wherefore talk 'd Don Lodowick with you ?
Tush , man ! we talk 'd of diamonds , not of Abigail .
Tell me , Mathias , is not that the Jew ?
As for the comment on the Maccabees , I have it , sir , and 't is at your command .
Yes , madam , and my talk with him was [ 77 ] About the borrowing of a book or two .
Converse not with him ; he is cast off from heaven. -- Thou hast thy crowns , fellow. -- Come , let 's away .
Sirrah Jew , remember the book .
Marry , will I , sir. [ Exeunt KATHARlNE and MATHIAS. ] FIRST OFFICER. Come , I have made a reasonable market ; let 's away. [ Exeunt OFFICERS with SLAVES . ]
Now let me know thy name , and therewithalThy birth , condition , and profession .
Faith , sir , my birth is but mean ; my name 's Ithamore ; my profession what you please .
Hast thou no trade ? then listen to my words , And I will teach [ thee ] that shall stick by thee : First , be thou void of these affections , Compassion , love , vain hope , and heartless fear ; Be mov 'd at nothing , see thou pity none , But to thyself smile when the Christians moan .
O , brave , master ! [ 78 ] I worship your nose [ 79 ] for this .
Faith , master , In setting Christian villages on fire , Chaining of eunuchs , binding galley-slaves.One time I was an hostler in an inn , And in the night-time secretly would I stealTo travellers ' chambers , and there cut their throats : Once at Jerusalem , where the pilgrims kneel 'd , I strewed powder on the marble stones , And therewithal their knees would rankle so , That I have laugh 'd a-good [ 81 ] to see the cripplesGo limping home to Christendom on stilts .
Why , this is something : make account of meAs of thy fellow ; we are villains both ; Both circumcised ; we hate Christians both : Be true and secret ; thou shalt want no gold.But stand aside ; here comes Don Lodowick.Enter LODOWICK. [ 82 ]
O , Barabas , well met ; Where is the diamond you told me of ?
I have it for you , sir : please you walk in with me. -- What , ho , Abigail ! open the door , I say ! Enter ABIGAIL , with letters .
In good time , father ; here are letters come ] From Ormus , and the post stays here within .
Give me the letters. -- Daughter , do you hear ? Entertain Lodowick , the governor 's son , With all the courtesy you can afford , Provided that you keep your maidenhead : Use him as if he were a Philistine ; Dissemble , swear , protest , vow love to him : [ 83 ] He is not of the seed of Abraham. -- [ Aside to her. ] I am a little busy , sir ; pray , pardon me. -- Abigail , bid him welcome for my sake .
For your sake and his own he 's welcome hither .
Daughter , a word more : kiss him , speak him fair , And like a cunning Jew so cast about , That ye be both made sure [ 84 ] ere you come out. [ Aside to her . ]
O father , Don Mathias is my love !
I know it : yet , I say , make love to him ; Do , it is requisite it should be so. -- [ Aside to her. ] Nay , on my life , it is my factor 's hand ; But go you in , I 'll think upon the account. [ Exeunt ABIGAIL and LODOWICK into the house. ] The account is made , for Lodovico [ 85 ] dies.My factor sends me word a merchant 's fledThat owes me for a hundred tun of wine : I weigh it thus much [ snapping his fingers ] ! I have wealth enough ; For now by this has he kiss 'd Abigail , And she vows love to him , and he to her.As sure as heaven rain 'd manna for the Jews , So sure shall he and Don Mathias die : His father was my chiefest enemy.Enter MATHIAS.Whither goes Don Mathias ? stay a while .
Whither , but to my fair love Abigail ?
Thou know'st , and heaven can witness it is true , That I intend my daughter shall be thine .
Ay , Barabas , or else thou wrong'st me much .
O , heaven forbid I should have such a thought ! Pardon me though I weep : the governor 's sonWill , whether I will or no , have Abigail ; He sends her letters , bracelets , jewels , rings .
Does she receive them ?
She ! no , Mathias , no , but sends them back ; And , when he comes , she locks herself up fast ; Yet through the key-hole will he talk to her , While she runs to the window , looking outWhen you should come and hale him from the door .
O treacherous Lodowick !
Even now , as I came home , he slipt me in , And I am sure he is with Abigail .
I 'll rouse him thence .
Not for all Malta ; therefore sheathe your sword ; If you love me , no quarrels in my house ; But steal you in , and seem to see him not : I 'll give him such a warning ere he goes , As he shall have small hopes of Abigail.Away , for here they come.Re-enter LODOWICK and ABIGAIL .
What , hand in hand ! I can not suffer this .
Mathias , as thou lov'st me , not a word .
Well , let it pass ; another time shall serve. [ Exit into the house . ]
Barabas , is not that the widow 's son ?
Ay , and take heed , for he hath sworn your death .
My death ! what , is the base-born peasant mad ?
No , no ; but happily [ 86 ] he stands in fearOf that which you , I think , ne'er dream upon , -- My daughter here , a paltry silly girl .
Why , loves she Don Mathias ?
Doth she not with her smiling answer you ?
He has my heart ; I smile against my will. [ Aside . ]
Barabas , thou know'st I have lov 'd thy daughter long .
And so has she done you , even from a child .
And now I can no longer hold my mind .
Nor I the affection that I bear to you .
This is thy diamond ; tell me , shall I have it ?
Win it , and wear it ; it is yet unsoil'd. [ 87 ] O , but I know your lordship would disdainTo marry with the daughter of a Jew : And yet I 'll give her many a golden cross [ 88 ] With Christian posies round about the ring .
'T is not thy wealth , but her that I esteem ; Yet crave I thy consent .
And mine you have ; yet let me talk to her. -- This offspring of Cain , this Jebusite , That never tasted of the Passover , Nor e'er shall see the land of Canaan , Nor our Messias that is yet to come ; This gentle maggot , Lodowick , I mean , Must be deluded : let him have thy hand , But keep thy heart till Don Mathias comes. [ Aside to her . ]
What , shall I be betroth 'd to Lodowick ?
It 's no sin to deceive a Christian ; For they themselves hold it a principle , Faith is not to be held with heretics : But all are heretics that are not Jews ; This follows well , and therefore , daughter , fear not. -- [ Aside to her. ] I have entreated her , and she will grant .
Then , gentle Abigail , plight thy faith to me .
I can not choose , seeing my father bids : Nothing but death shall part my love and me .
Now have I that for which my soul hath long 'd .
So have not I ; but yet I hope I shall. [ Aside . ]
O wretched Abigail , what hast thou [ 89 ] done ? [ Aside . ]
Why on the sudden is your colour chang 'd ?
I know not : but farewell ; I must be gone .
Stay her , but let her not speak one word more .
Mute o ' the sudden ! here 's a sudden change .
O , muse not at it ; 't is the Hebrews ' guise , That maidens new-betroth 'd should weep a while : Trouble her not ; sweet Lodowick , depart : She is thy wife , and thou shalt be mine heir .
O , is't the custom ? then I am resolv 'd : [ 90 ] But rather let the brightsome heavens be dim , And nature 's beauty choke with stifling clouds , Than my fair Abigail should frown on me. -- There comes the villain ; now I 'll be reveng'd.Re-enter MATHIAS .
Be quiet , Lodowick ; it is enoughThat I have made thee sure to Abigail .
Well , let him go. [ Exit . ]
Well , but for me , as you went in at doorsYou had been stabb 'd : but not a word o n't now ; Here must no speeches pass , nor swords be drawn .
Suffer me , Barabas , but to follow him .
No ; so shall I , if any hurt be done , Be made an accessary of your deeds : Revenge it on him when you meet him next .
For this I 'll have his heart .
Do so. Lo , here I give thee Abigail !
What greater gift can poor Mathias have ? Shall Lodowick rob me of so fair a love ? My life is not so dear as Abigail .
My heart misgives me , that , to cross your love , He 's with your mother ; therefore after him .
What , is he gone unto my mother ?
Nay , if you will , stay till she comes herself .
I can not stay ; for , if my mother come , She 'll die with grief. [ Exit . ]
I can not take my leave of him for tears.Father , why have you thus incens 'd them both ?
What 's that to thee ?
I 'll make 'em friends again .
You 'll make 'em friends ! are there not Jews enow in Malta , But thou must dote upon a Christian ?
I will have Don Mathias ; he is my love .
Yes , you shall have him. -- Go , put her in .
Ay , I 'll put her in. [ Puts in ABIGAIL . ]
Now tell me , Ithamore , how lik'st thou this ?
Faith , master , I think by thisYou purchase both their lives : is it not so ?
True ; and it shall be cunningly perform 'd .
O , master , that I might have a hand in this !
Ay , so thou shalt ; 't is thou must do the deed : Take this , and bear it to Mathias straight , [ Giving a letter. ] And tell him that it comes from Lodowick .
'T is poison 'd , is it not ?
No , no ; and yet it might be done that way : It is a challenge feign 'd from Lodowick .
Fear not ; I will so set his heart a-fire , That he shall verily think it comes from him .
I can not choose but like thy readiness : Yet be not rash , but do it cunningly .
As I behave myself in this , employ me hereafter .
Away , then ! [ Exit ITHAMORE. ] So ; now will I go in to Lodowick , And , like a cunning spirit , feign some lie , Till I have set 'em both at enmity. [ Exit. ] ACT III.Enter BELLAMIRA. [ 91 ]
Since this town was besieg 'd , my gain grows cold : The time has been , that but for one bare nightA hundred ducats have been freely given ; But now against my will I must be chaste : And yet I know my beauty doth not fail. ] From Venice merchants , and from PaduaWere wont to come rare-witted gentlemen , Scholars I mean , learned and liberal ; And now , save Pilia-Borza , comes there none , And he is very seldom from my house ; And here he comes.Enter PILIA-BORZA.PILIA-BORZA.Hold thee , wench , there 's something for thee to spend. [ Shewing a bag of silver . ]
'T is silver ; I disdain it.PILIA-BORZA. Ay , but the Jew has gold , And I will have it , or it shall go hard .
Tell me , how cam'st thou by this ? PILIA-BORZA. Faith , walking the back-lanes , through the gardens , I chanced to cast mine eye up to the Jew 's counting-house , whereI saw some bags of money , and in the night I clambered up withmy hooks ; and , as I was taking my choice , I heard a rumbling inthe house ; so I took only this , and run my way. -- But here 's theJew 's man .
Hide the bag.Enter ITHAMORE.PILIA-BORZA. Look not towards him , let 's away. Zoons , what alooking thou keepest ! thou'lt betray 's anon. [ Exeunt BELLAMIRA and PILIA-BORZA . ]
O , the sweetest face that ever I beheld ! I know sheis a courtezan by her attire : now would I give a hundred ofthe Jew 's crowns that I had such a concubine.Well , I have deliver 'd the challenge in such sort , As meet they will , and fighting die , -- brave sport ! [ Exit. ] Enter MATHIAS .
This is the place : [ 92 ] now Abigail shall seeWhether Mathias holds her dear or no.Enter LODOWICK.What , dares the villain write in such base terms ? [ Looking at a letter . ]
I did it ; and revenge it , if thou dar'st ! [ They fight. ] Enter BARABAS above .
O , bravely fought ! and yet they thrust not home.Now , Lodovico ! [ 93 ] now , Mathias ! -- So ; [ Both fall. ] So , now they have shew 'd themselves to be tall [ 94 ] fellows. [ Cries within ] Part 'em , part 'em !
Ay , part 'em now they are dead. Farewell , farewell ! [ Exit above. ] Enter FERNEZE , KATHARINE , and ATTENDANTS .
What sight is this ! [ 95 ] my Lodovico [ 96 ] slain ! These arms of mine shall be thy sepulchre. [ 97 ]
Who is this ? my son Mathias slain !
O Lodowick , hadst thou perish 'd by the Turk , Wretched Ferneze might have veng 'd thy death !
Thy son slew mine , and I 'll revenge his death .
Look , Katharine , look ! thy son gave mine these wounds .
O , leave to grieve me ! I am griev 'd enough .
O , that my sighs could turn to lively breath , And these my tears to blood , that he might live !
Who made them enemies ?
I know not ; and that grieves me most of all .
My son lov 'd thine .
And so did Lodowick him .
Lend me that weapon that did kill my son , And it shall murder me .
Nay , madam , stay ; that weapon was my son 's , And on that rather should Ferneze die .
Hold ; let 's inquire the causers of their deaths , That we may venge their blood upon their heads .
Then take them up , and let them be interr'dWithin one sacred monument of stone ; Upon which altar I will offer upMy daily sacrifice of sighs and tears , And with my prayers pierce impartial heavens , Till they [ reveal ] the causers of our smarts , Which forc 'd their hands divide united hearts.Come , Katharine ; [ 98 ] our losses equal are ; Then of true grief let us take equal share. [ Exeunt with the bodies. ] Enter ITHAMORE. [ 99 ]
Why , was there ever seen such villany , So neatly plotted , and so well perform 'd ? Both held in hand , [ 100 ] and flatly both beguil 'd ? Enter ABIGAIL .
Why , how now , Ithamore ! why laugh'st thou so ?
O mistress ! ha , ha , ha !
Why , what ail'st thou ?
O , my master !
Ha !
O mistress , I have the bravest , gravest , secret , subtle , bottle-nosed [ 101 ] knave to my master , that evergentleman had !
Say , knave , why rail'st upon my father thus ?
O , my master has the bravest policy !
Wherein ?
Why , know you not ?
Why , no .
Know you not of Mathia [ s ' ] and Don Lodowick [ 's ] disaster ?
No : what was it ?
Why , the devil inverted a challenge , my masterwrit it , and I carried it , first to Lodowick , and imprimisto Mathia [ s ] ; And then they met , [ and ] , as the story says , In doleful wise they ended both their days .
And was my father furtherer of their deaths ?
Am I Ithamore ?
Yes .
So sure did your father write , and I carry the challenge .
Well , Ithamore , let me request thee this ; Go to the new-made nunnery , and inquireFor any of the friars of Saint Jaques , [ 102 ] And say , I pray them come and speak with me .
I pray , mistress , will you answer me to one question ?
Well , sirrah , what is't ?
A very feeling one : have not the nuns fine sport withthe friars now and then ?
Go to , Sirrah Sauce ! is this your question ? get ye gone .
I will , forsooth , mistress. [ Exit . ]
Hard-hearted father , unkind Barabas ! Was this the pursuit of thy policy , To make me shew them favour severally , That by my favour they should both be slain ? Admit thou lov'dst not Lodowick for his sire , [ 103 ] Yet Don Mathias ne'er offended thee : But thou wert set upon extreme revenge , Because the prior dispossess 'd thee once , And couldst not venge it but upon his son ; Nor on his son but by Mathias ' means ; Nor on Mathias but by murdering me : But I perceive there is no love on earth , Pity in Jews , nor piety in Turks. -- But here comes cursed Ithamore with the friar.Re-enter ITHAMORE with FRIAR JACOMO.FRIAR JACOMO. Virgo , salve .
When duck you ?
Welcome , grave friar. -- Ithamore , be gone. [ Exit ITHAMORE. ] Know , holy sir , I am bold to solicit thee.FRIAR JACOMO. Wherein ?
To get me be admitted for a nun.FRIAR JACOMO. Why , Abigail , it is not yet long sinceThat I did labour thy admission , And then thou didst not like that holy life .
Then were my thoughts so frail and unconfirm'dAs [ 104 ] I was chain 'd to follies of the world : But now experience , purchased with grief , Has made me see the difference of things.My sinful soul , alas , hath pac 'd too longThe fatal labyrinth of misbelief , Far from the sun that gives eternal life ! FRIAR JACOMO. Who taught thee this ?
The abbess of the house , Whose zealous admonition I embrace : O , therefore , Jacomo , let me be one , Although unworthy , of that sisterhood ! FRIAR JACOMO. Abigail , I will : but see thou change no more , For that will be most heavy to thy soul .
That was my father 's fault.FRIAR JACOMO. Thy father 's ! how ?
Nay , you shall pardon me. -- O Barabas , Though thou deservest hardly at my hands , Yet never shall these lips bewray thy life ! [ Aside. ] FRIAR JACOMO. Come , shall we go ?
My duty waits on you. [ Exeunt. ] Enter BARABAS , [ 105 ] reading a letter .
What , Abigail become a nun again ! False and unkind ! what , hast thou lost thy father ? And , all unknown and unconstrain 'd of me , Art thou again got to the nunnery ? Now here she writes , and wills me to repent : Repentance ! Spurca ! what pretendeth [ 106 ] this ? I fear she knows -- 't is so -- of my deviceIn Don Mathias ' and Lodovico 's deaths : If so , 't is time that it be seen into ; For she that varies from me in belief , Gives great presumption that she loves me not , Or , loving , doth dislike of something done. -- But who comes here ? Enter ITHAMORE.O Ithamore , come near ; Come near , my love ; come near , thy master 's life , My trusty servant , nay , my second self ; [ 107 ] For I have now no hope but even in thee , And on that hope my happiness is built.When saw'st thou Abigail ?
To-day .
With whom ?
A friar .
A friar ! false villain , he hath done the deed .
How , sir !
Why , made mine Abigail a nun .
That 's no lie ; for she sent me for him .
O unhappy day ! False , credulous , inconstant Abigail ! But let 'em go : and , Ithamore , from henceNe'er shall she grieve me more with her disgrace ; Ne'er shall she live to inherit aught of mine , Be bless 'd of me , nor come within my gates , But perish underneath my bitter curse , Like Cain by Adam for his brother 's death .
O master --
Ithamore , entreat not for her ; I am mov 'd , And she is hateful to my soul and me : And , 'less [ 108 ] thou yield to this that I entreat , I can not think but that thou hat'st my life .
Who , I , master ? why , I 'll run to some rock , And throw myself headlong into the sea ; Why , I 'll do any thing for your sweet sake .
O trusty Ithamore ! no servant , but my friend ! I here adopt thee for mine only heir : All that I have is thine when I am dead ; And , whilst I live , use half ; spend as myself ; Here , take my keys , -- I 'll give 'em thee anon ; Go buy thee garments ; but thou shalt not want : Only know this , that thus thou art to do -- But first go fetch me in the pot of riceThat for our supper stands upon the fire .
I hold my head , my master 's hungry [ Aside ] . -- I go , sir. [ Exit . ]
Thus every villain ambles after wealth , Although he ne'er be richer than in hope : -- But , husht ! Re-enter ITHAMORE with the pot .
Here 't is , master .
Well said , [ 109 ] Ithamore ! What , hast thou broughtThe ladle with thee too ?
Yes , sir ; the proverb says , [ 110 ] he that eats with thedevil had need of a long spoon ; I have brought you a ladle .
Very well , Ithamore ; then now be secret ; And , for thy sake , whom I so dearly love , Now shalt thou see the death of Abigail , That thou mayst freely live to be my heir .
Why , master , will you poison her with a mess of rice-porridge ? that will preserve life , make her round and plump , andbatten [ 111 ] more than you are aware .
Ay , but , Ithamore , seest thou this ? It is a precious powder that I boughtOf an Italian , in Ancona , once , Whose operation is to bind , infect , And poison deeply , yet not appearIn forty hours after it is ta'en .
How , master ?
Thus , Ithamore : This even they use in Malta here , -- 't is call'dSaint Jaques ' Even , -- and then , I say , they useTo send their alms unto the nunneries : Among the rest , bear this , and set it there : There 's a dark entry where they take it in , Where they must neither see the messenger , Nor make inquiry who hath sent it them .
How so ?
Belike there is some ceremony in't.There , Ithamore , must thou go place this pot : [ 112 ] Stay ; let me spice it first .
Pray , do , and let me help you , master.Pray , let me taste first .
Prithee , do. [ ITHAMORE tastes. ] What say'st thou now ?
Troth , master , I 'm loath such a pot of pottage shouldbe spoiled .
Peace , Ithamore ! 't is better so than spar'd. [ Puts the powder into the pot. ] Assure thyself thou shalt have broth by the eye : [ 113 ] My purse , my coffer , and myself is thine .
Well , master , I go .
Stay ; first let me stir it , Ithamore.As fatal be it to her as the draughtOf which great Alexander drunk , and died ; And with her let it work like Borgia 's wine , Whereof his sire the Pope was poisoned ! In few , [ 114 ] the blood of Hydra , Lerna 's bane , The juice of hebon , [ 115 ] and Cocytus ' breath , And all the poisons of the Stygian pool , Break from the fiery kingdom , and in thisVomit your venom , and envenom herThat , like a fiend , hath left her father thus !
What a blessing has he give n't ! was ever pot ofrice-porridge so sauced ? [ Aside ] . -- What shall I do with it ?
O my sweet Ithamore , go set it down ; And come again so soon as thou hast done , For I have other business for thee .
Here 's a drench to poison a whole stable of Flanders
And the horse-pestilence to boot : away !
I am gone : Pay me my wages , for my work is done. [ Exit with the pot . ]
I 'll pay thee with a vengeance , Ithamore ! [ Exit. ] Enter FERNEZE , [ 116 ] MARTIN DEL BOSCO , KNIGHTS , and BASSO .
Welcome , great basso : [ 117 ] how fares Calymath ? What wind drives you thus into Malta-road ?
The wind that bloweth all the world besides , Desire of gold .
Desire of gold , great sir ! That 's to be gotten in the Western Inde : In Malta are no golden minerals .
To you of Malta thus saith Calymath : The time you took for respite is at handFor the performance of your promise pass 'd ; And for the tribute-money I am sent .
Basso , in brief , shalt have no tribute here , Nor shall the heathens live upon our spoil : First will we raze the city-walls ourselves , Lay waste the island , hew the temples down , And , shipping off our goods to Sicily , Open an entrance for the wasteful sea , Whose billows , beating the resistless banks , [ 118 ] Shall overflow it with their refluence .
Well , governor , since thou hast broke the leagueBy flat denial of the promis 'd tribute , Talk not of razing down your city-walls ; You shall not need trouble yourselves so far , For Selim Calymath shall come himself , And with brass bullets batter down your towers , And turn proud Malta to a wilderness , For these intolerable wrongs of yours : And so , farewell .
Farewell. [ Exit BASSO. ] And now , you men of Malta , look about , And let 's provide to welcome Calymath : Close your port-cullis , charge your basilisks , [ 119 ] And , as you profitably take up arms , So now courageously encounter them , For by this answer broken is the league , And naught is to be look 'd for now but wars , And naught to us more welcome is than wars. [ Exeunt. ] Enter FRIAR JACOMO [ 120 ] and FRIAR BARNARDINE.FRIAR JACOMO. O brother , brother , all the nuns are sick , And physic will not help them ! they must die.FRIAR BARNARDINE. The abbess sent for me to be confess 'd : O , what a sad confession will there be ! FRIAR JACOMO. And so did fair Maria send for me : I 'll to her lodging ; hereabouts she lies. [ Exit. ] Enter ABIGAIL.FRIAR BARNARDINE. What , all dead , save only Abigail !
And I shall die too , for I feel death coming.Where is the friar that convers 'd with me ? [ 121 ] FRIAR BARNARDINE. O , he is gone to see the other nuns .
I sent for him ; but , seeing you are come , Be you my ghostly father : and first know , That in this house I liv 'd religiously , Chaste , and devout , much sorrowing for my sins ; But , ere I came -- FRIAR BARNARDINE. What then ?
I did offend high heaven so grievouslyAs I am almost desperate for my sins ; And one offense torments me more than all.You knew Mathias and Don Lodowick ? FRIAR BARNARDINE. Yes ; what of them ?
My father did contract me to 'em both ; First to Don Lodowick : him I never lov 'd ; Mathias was the man that I held dear , And for his sake did I become a nun.FRIAR BARNARDINE. So : say how was their end ?
Both , jealous of my love , envied [ 122 ] each other ; And by my father 's practice , [ 123 ] which is there [ Gives writing. ] Set down at large , the gallants were both slain.FRIAR BARNARDINE. O , monstrous villany !
To work my peace , this I confess to thee : Reveal it not ; for then my father dies.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Know that confession must not be reveal 'd ; The canon-law forbids it , and the priestThat makes it known , being degraded first , Shall be condemn 'd , and then sent to the fire .
So I have heard ; pray , therefore , keep it close.Death seizeth on my heart : ah , gentle friar , Convert my father that he may be sav 'd , And witness that I die a Christian ! [ Dies. ] FRIAR BARNARDINE. Ay , and a virgin too ; that grieves me most.But I must to the Jew , and exclaim on him , And make him stand in fear of me.Re-enter FRIAR JACOMO.FRIAR JACOMO. O brother , all the nuns are dead ! let 's bury them.FRIAR BARNARDINE. First help to bury this ; then go with me , And help me to exclaim against the Jew.FRIAR JACOMO. Why , what has he done ? FRIAR BARNARDINE. A thing that makes me tremble to unfold.FRIAR JACOMO. What , has he crucified a child ? [ 124 ] FRIAR BARNARDINE. No , but a worse thing : 't was told me in shrift ; Thou know'st 't is death , an if it be reveal'd.Come , let 's away. [ Exeunt. ] ACT IV.Enter BARABAS [ 125 ] and ITHAMORE. Bells within .
There is no music to [ 126 ] a Christian 's knell : How sweet the bells ring , now the nuns are dead , That sound at other times like tinkers ' pans ! I was afraid the poison had not wrought , Or , though it wrought , it would have done no good , For every year they swell , and yet they live : Now all are dead , not one remains alive .
That 's brave , master : but think you it will not be known ?
How can it , if we two be secret ?
For my part , fear you not .
I 'd cut thy throat , if I did .
And reason too.But here 's a royal monastery hard by ; Good master , let me poison all the monks .
Thou shalt not need ; for , now the nuns are dead , They 'll die with grief .
Do you not sorrow for your daughter 's death ?
No , but I grieve because she liv 'd so long , An Hebrew born , and would become a Christian : Cazzo , [ 127 ] diabolo !
Look , look , master ; here come two religious caterpillars.Enter FRIAR JACOMO and FRIAR BARNARDINE .
I smelt 'em ere they came .
God-a-mercy , nose ! [ 128 ] Come , let 's begone.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Stay , wicked Jew ; repent , I say , and stay.FRIAR JACOMO. Thou hast offended , therefore must be damn 'd .
I fear they know we sent the poison 'd broth .
And so do I , master ; therefore speak 'em fair.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Barabas , thou hast -- FRIAR JACOMO. Ay , that thou hast --
True , I have money ; what though I have ? FRIAR BARNARDINE. Thou art a -- FRIAR JACOMO. Ay , that thou art , a --
What needs all this ? I know I am a Jew.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Thy daughter -- FRIAR JACOMO. Ay , thy daughter --
O , speak not of her ! then I die with grief.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Remember that -- FRIAR JACOMO. Ay , remember that --
I must needs say that I have been a great usurer.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Thou hast committed --
Fornication : but that was in another country ; And besides , the wench is dead.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Ay , but , Barabas , Remember Mathias and Don Lodowick .
Why , what of them ? FRIAR BARNARDINE.I will not say that by a forged challenge they met .
She has confess 'd , and we are both undone , My bosom inmate ! [ 129 ] but I must dissemble. -- [ Aside to ITHAMORE. ] O holy friars , the burden of my sinsLie heavy [ 130 ] on my soul ! then , pray you , tell me , Is't not too late now to turn Christian ? I have been zealous in the Jewish faith , Hard-hearted to the poor , a covetous wretch , That would for lucre 's sake have sold my soul ; A hundred for a hundred I have ta'en ; And now for store of wealth may I compareWith all the Jews in Malta : but what is wealth ? I am a Jew , and therefore am I lost.Would penance serve [ to atone ] for this my sin , I could afford to whip myself to death , --
And so could I ; but penance will not serve .
To fast , to pray , and wear a shirt of hair , And on my knees creep to Jerusalem.Cellars of wine , and sollars [ 131 ] full of wheat , Warehouses stuff 'd with spices and with drugs , Whole chests of gold in bullion and in coin , Besides , I know not how much weight in pearlOrient and round , have I within my house ; At Alexandria merchandise untold ; [ 132 ] But yesterday two ships went from this town , Their voyage will be worth ten thousand crowns ; In Florence , Venice , Antwerp , London , Seville , Frankfort , Lubeck , Moscow , and where not , Have I debts owing ; and , in most of these , Great sums of money lying in the banco ; All this I 'll give to some religious house , So I may be baptiz 'd , and live therein.FRIAR JACOMO. O good Barabas , come to our house ! FRIAR BARNARDINE. O , no , good Barabas , come to our house ! And , Barabas , you know --
I know that I have highly sinn 'd : You shall convert me , you shall have all my wealth.FRIAR JACOMO. O Barabas , their laws are strict !
I know they are ; and I will be with you.FRIAR BARNARDINE. They wear no shirts , and they go bare-foot too .
Then 't is not for me ; and I am resolv'dYou shall confess me , and have all my goods.FRIAR JACOMO. Good Barabas , come to me .
You see I answer him , and yet he stays ; Rid him away , and go you home with me.FRIAR JACOMO. I 'll be with you to-night .
Come to my house at one o'clock this night.FRIAR JACOMO. You hear your answer , and you may be gone.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Why , go , get you away.FRIAR JACOMO. I will not go for thee.FRIAR BARNARDINE. Not ! then I 'll make thee go.FRIAR JACOMO. How ! dost call me rogue ? [ They fight . ]
Part 'em , master , part 'em .
This is mere frailty : brethren , be content. -- Friar Barnardine , go you with Ithamore : You know my mind ; let me alone with him.FRIAR JACOMO. Why does he go to thy house ? let him be gone. [ 133 ]
I 'll give him something , and so stop his mouth. [ Exit ITHAMORE with Friar BARNARDINE. ] I never heard of any man but heMalign 'd the order of the Jacobins : But do you think that I believe his words ? Why , brother , you converted Abigail ; And I am bound in charity to requite it , And so I will. O Jacomo , fail not , but come.FRIAR JACOMO. But , Barabas , who shall be your godfathers ? For presently you shall be shriv 'd .
Marry , the Turk [ 134 ] shall be one of my godfathers , But not a word to any of your covent. [ 135 ] FRIAR JACOMO. I warrant thee , Barabas. [ Exit . ]
So , now the fear is past , and I am safe ; For he that shriv 'd her is within my house : What , if I murder 'd him ere Jacomo comes ? Now I have such a plot for both their lives , As never Jew nor Christian knew the like : One turn 'd my daughter , therefore he shall die ; The other knows enough to have my life , Therefore 't is not requisite he should live. [ 136 ] But are not both these wise men , to supposeThat I will leave my house , my goods , and all , To fast and be well whipt ? I 'll none of that.Now , Friar Barnardine , I come to you : I 'll feast you , lodge you , give you fair [ 137 ] words , And , after that , I and my trusty Turk -- No more , but so : it must and shall be done. [ 138 ] Enter ITHAMORE.Ithamore , tell me , is the friar asleep ?
Yes ; and I know not what the reason is , Do what I can , he will not strip himself , Nor go to bed , but sleeps in his own clothes : I fear me he mistrusts what we intend .
No ; 't is an order which the friars use : Yet , if he knew our meanings , could he scape ?
No , none can hear him , cry he ne'er so loud .
Why , true ; therefore did I place him there : The other chambers open towards the street .
You loiter , master ; wherefore stay we thus ? O , how I long to see him shake his heels !
Come on , sirrah : Off with your girdle ; make a handsome noose. -- [ ITHAMORE takes off his girdle , and ties a noose on it. ] Friar , awake ! [ 139 ] [ They put the noose round the FRIAR 'S neck. ] FRIAR BARNARDINE. What , do you mean to strangle me ?
Yes , 'cause you use to confess .
Blame not us , but the proverb , -- Confess and behanged. -- Pull hard.FRIAR BARNARDINE. What , will you have [ 140 ] my life ?
Pull hard , I say. -- You would have had my goods .
Ay , and our lives too : -- therefore pull amain. [ They strangle the FRIAR. ] 'T is neatly done , sir ; here 's no print at all .
Then is it as it should be. Take him up .
Nay , master , be ruled by me a little. [ Takes the body , sets it upright against the wall , and puts a staff in its hand. ] So , let him lean upon his staff ; excellent ! he stands as if hewere begging of bacon .
Who would not think but that this friar liv 'd ? What time o ' night is't now , sweet Ithamore ?
Towards one. [ 141 ]
Then will not Jacomo be long from hence. [ Exeunt. ] Enter FRIAR JACOMO. [ 142 ] FRIAR JACOMO. This is the hour wherein I shall proceed ; [ 143 ] O happy hour , wherein I shall convertAn infidel , and bring his gold into our treasury ! But soft ! is not this Barnardine ? it is ; And , understanding I should come this way , Stands here o ' purpose , meaning me some wrong , And intercept my going to the Jew. -- Barnardine ! Wilt thou not speak ? thou think'st I see thee not ; Away , I 'd wish thee , and let me go by : No , wilt thou not ? nay , then , I 'll force my way ; And , see , a staff stands ready for the purpose.As thou lik'st that , stop me another time ! [ Takes the staff , and strikes down the body. ] Enter BARABAS and ITHAMORE .
Why , how now , Jacomo ! what hast thou done ? FRIAR JACOMO. Why , stricken him that would have struck at me .
Who is it ? Barnardine ! now , out , alas , he is slain !
Ay , master , he 's slain ; look how his brains drop outon 's [ 144 ] nose.FRIAR JACOMO. Good sirs , I have done't : but nobody knows it butyou two ; I may escape .
So might my man and I hang with you for company .
No ; let us bear him to the magistrates.FRIAR JACOMO. Good Barabas , let me go .
No , pardon me ; the law must have his course : I must be forc 'd to give in evidence , That , being importun 'd by this BarnardineTo be a Christian , I shut him out , And there he sate : now I , to keep my word , And give my goods and substance to your house , Was up thus early , with intent to goUnto your friary , because you stay 'd .
Fie upon 'em ! master , will you turn Christian , whenholy friars turn devils and murder one another ?
No ; for this example I 'll remain a Jew : Heaven bless me ! what , a friar a murderer ! When shall you see a Jew commit the like ?
Why , a Turk could ha ' done no more .
To-morrow is the sessions ; you shall to it. -- Come , Ithamore , let 's help to take him hence.FRIAR JACOMO. Villains , I am a sacred person ; touch me not .
The law shall touch you ; we 'll but lead you , we : 'Las , I could weep at your calamity ! -- Take in the staff too , for that must be shown : Law wills that each particular be known. [ Exeunt. ] Enter BELLAMIRA [ 145 ] and PILIA-BORZA .
Pilia-Borza , didst thou meet with Ithamore ? PILIA-BORZA. I did .
And didst thou deliver my letter ? PILIA-BORZA. I did .
And what thinkest thou ? will he come ? PILIA-BORZA. I think so : and yet I can not tell ; for , at thereading of the letter , he looked like a man of another world .
Why so ? PILIA-BORZA. That such a base slave as he should be saluted bysuch a tall [ 146 ] man as I am , from such a beautiful dame as you .
And what said he ? PILIA-BORZA. Not a wise word ; only gave me a nod , as who shouldsay , `` Is it even so ? '' and so I left him , being driven to anon-plus at the critical aspect of my terrible countenance .
And where didst meet him ? PILIA-BORZA. Upon mine own free-hold , within forty foot of thegallows , conning his neck-verse , [ 147 ] I take it , looking of [ 148 ] a friar 's execution ; whom I saluted with an old hempen proverb , Hodie tibi , cras mihi , and so I left him to the mercy of the
Enter ITHAMORE .
I never knew a man take his death so patiently asthis friar ; he was ready to leap off ere the halter was abouthis neck ; and , when the hangman had put on his hempen tippet , he made such haste to his prayers , as if he had had anothercure to serve. Well , go whither he will , I 'll be none of hisfollowers in haste : and , now I think o n't , going to theexecution , a fellow met me with a muschatoes [ 150 ] like a raven'swing , and a dagger with a hilt like a warming-pan ; and he gaveme a letter from one Madam Bellamira , saluting me in such sortas if he had meant to make clean my boots with his lips ; theeffect was , that I should come to her house : I wonder what thereason is ; it may be she sees more in me than I can find inmyself ; for she writes further , that she loves me ever since shesaw me ; and who would not requite such love ? Here 's her house ; and here she comes ; and now would I were gone ! I am not worthyto look upon her.PILIA-BORZA. This is the gentleman you writ to .
Gentleman ! he flouts me : what gentry can be in a poorTurk of tenpence ? [ 151 ] I 'll be gone. [ Aside . ]
Is't not a sweet-faced youth , Pilia ?
Again , sweet youth ! [ Aside. ] -- Did not you , sir , bringthe sweet youth a letter ? PILIA-BORZA. I did , sir , and from this gentlewoman , who , asmyself and the rest of the family , stand or fall at your service .
Though woman 's modesty should hale me back , I can withhold no longer : welcome , sweet love .
Now am I clean , or rather foully , out of the way. [ Aside . ]
Whither so soon ?
I 'll go steal some money from my master to make mehandsome [ Aside ] . -- Pray , pardon me ; I must go see a shipdischarged .
Canst thou be so unkind to leave me thus ? PILIA-BORZA. An ye did but know how she loves you , sir !
Nay , I care not how much she loves me. -- SweetBellamira , would I had my master 's wealth for thy sake ! PILIA-BORZA. And you can have it , sir , an if you please .
If 'twere above ground , I could , and would have it ; but he hides and buries it up , as partridges do their eggs , under the earth.PILIA-BORZA. And is't not possible to find it out ?
By no means possible .
What shall we do with this base villain , then ? [ Aside to PILIA-BORZA. ] PILIA-BORZA. Let me alone ; do but you speak him fair. -- [ Aside to her. ] But you know [ 152 ] some secrets of the Jew , Which , if they were reveal 'd , would do him harm .
Ay , and such as -- go to , no more ! I 'll make him [ 153 ] send me half he has , and glad he scapes so too : I 'll write untohim ; we 'll have money straight.PILIA-BORZA. Send for a hundred crowns at least .
Ten hundred thousand crowns. -- [ writing ] MASTER BARABAS , -- PILIA-BORZA. Write not so submissively , but threatening him .
[ writing ] SIRRAH BARABAS , SEND ME A HUNDRED CROWNS.PILIA-BORZA. Put in two hundred at least .
[ writing ] I CHARGE THEE SEND ME THREE HUNDRED BY THISBEARER , AND THIS SHALL BE YOUR WARRANT : IF YOU DO NOT -- NO MORE , BUT SO.PILIA-BORZA. Tell him you will confess .
[ writing ] OTHERWISE I 'LL CONFESS ALL. -- Vanish , and return in a twinkle.PILIA-BORZA. Let me alone ; I 'll use him in his kind .
Hang him , Jew ! [ Exit PILIA-BORZA with the letter . ]
Now , gentle Ithamore , lie in my lap. -- Where are my maids ? provide a cunning [ 154 ] banquet ; Send to the merchant , bid him bring me silks ; Shall Ithamore , my love , go in such rags ?
And bid the jeweller come hither too .
I have no husband ; sweet , I 'll marry thee .
Content : but we will leave this paltry land , And sail from hence to Greece , to lovely Greece ; -- I 'll be thy Jason , thou my golden fleece ; -- Where painted carpets o'er the meads are hurl 'd , And Bacchus ' vineyards overspread the world ; Where woods and forests go in goodly green ; -- I 'll be Adonis , thou shalt be Love 's Queen ; -- The meads , the orchards , and the primrose-lanes , Instead of sedge and reed , bear sugar-canes : Thou in those groves , by Dis above , Shalt live with me , and be my love. [ 155 ]
Whither will I not go with gentle Ithamore ? Re-enter PILIA-BORZA .
How now ! hast thou the gold [ ? ] PILIA-BORZA. Yes .
But came it freely ? did the cow give down her milkfreely ? PILIA-BORZA. At reading of the letter , he stared and stamped , and turned aside : I took him by the beard , [ 156 ] and looked uponhim thus ; told him he were best to send it : then he hugged andembraced me .
Rather for fear than love.PILIA-BORZA. Then , like a Jew , he laughed and jeered , and toldme he loved me for your sake , and said what a faithful servantyou had been .
The more villain he to keep me thus : here 's goodly'parel , is there not ? PILIA-BORZA. To conclude , he gave me ten crowns. [ Delivers the money to ITHAMORE . ]
But ten ? I 'll not leave him worth a grey groat. Giveme a ream of paper : we 'll have a kingdom of gold for't. [ 157 ] PILIA-BORZA. Write for five hundred crowns .
[ writing ] SIRRAH JEW , AS YOU LOVE YOUR LIFE , SEND MEFIVE HUNDRED CROWNS , AND GIVE THE BEARER A HUNDRED. -- Tell himI must have't.PILIA-BORZA. I warrant , your worship shall have't .
And , if he ask why I demand so much , tell him I scornto write a line under a hundred crowns.PILIA-BORZA. You 'd make a rich poet , sir. I am gone. [ Exit with the letter . ]
Take thou the money ; spend it for my sake .
'T is not thy money , but thyself I weigh : Thus Bellamira esteems of gold ; [ Throws it aside. ] But thus of thee. [ Kisses him . ]
That kiss again ! -- She runs division [ 158 ] of mylips. What an eye she casts on me ! it twinkles like a star. [ Aside . ]
Come , my dear love , let 's in and sleep together .
O , that ten thousand nights were put in one , thatwe might sleep seven years together afore we wake !
Come , amorous wag , first banquet , and then sleep. [ Exeunt. ] Enter BARABAS , [ 159 ] reading a letter .
BARABAS , SEND ME THREE HUNDRED CROWNS ; -- Plain Barabas ! O , that wicked courtezan ! He was not wont to call me Barabas ; -- OR ELSE I WILL CONFESS ; -- ay , there it goes : But , if I get him , coupe de gorge for that.He sent a shaggy , tatter 'd , [ 160 ] staring slave , That , when he speaks , draws out his grisly beard , And winds it twice or thrice about his ear ; Whose face has been a grind-stone for men 's swords ; His hands are hack 'd , some fingers cut quite off ; Who , when he speaks , grunts like a hog , and looksLike one that is employ 'd in catzery [ 161 ] And cross-biting ; [ 162 ] such a rogueAs is the husband to a hundred whores ; And I by him must send three hundred crowns.Well , my hope is , he will not stay there still ; And , when he comes -- O , that he were but here ! Enter PILIA-BORZA.PILIA-BORZA. Jew , I must ha ' more gold .
Why , want'st thou any of thy tale ? [ 163 ] PILIA-BORZA. No ; but three hundred will not serve his turn .
Not serve his turn , sir ! PILIA-BORZA.No , sir ; and therefore I must have five hundred more .
I 'll rather -- -- PILIA-BORZA. O , good words , sir , and send it you were best ! see , there 's his letter. [ Gives letter . ]
Might he not as well come as send ? pray , bid him comeand fetch it : what he writes for you , [ 164 ] ye shall havestraight.PILIA-BORZA. Ay , and the rest too , or else -- --
I must make this villain away [ Aside ] . -- Please you dinewith me , sir -- and you shall be most heartily poisoned. [ Aside. ] PILIA-BORZA. No , God-a-mercy. Shall I have these crowns ?
I can not do it ; I have lost my keys.PILIA-BORZA. O , if that be all , I can pick ope your locks .
Or climb up to my counting-house window : you know my meaning.PILIA-BORZA. I know enough , and therefore talk not to me ofyour counting-house. The gold ! or know , Jew , it is in my powerto hang thee .
I am betray'd. -- [ Aside. ] 'T is not five hundred crowns that I esteem ; I am not mov 'd at that : this angers me , That he , who knows I love him as myself , Should write in this imperious vein. Why , sir , You know I have no child , and unto whomShould I leave all , but unto Ithamore ? PILIA-BORZA. Here 's many words , but no crowns : the crowns !
Commend me to him , sir , most humbly , And unto your good mistress as unknown.PILIA-BORZA. Speak , shall I have 'em , sir ?
Sir , here they are. -- [ Gives money. ] O , that I should part [ 165 ] with so much gold ! -- [ Aside. ] Here , take 'em , fellow , with as good a will -- -- As I would see thee hang 'd [ Aside ] . O , love stops my breath ! Never lov 'd man servant as I do Ithamore.PILIA-BORZA. I know it , sir .
Pray , when , sir , shall I see you at my house ? PILIA-BORZA. Soon enough to your cost , sir. Fare you well. [ Exit . ]
Nay , to thine own cost , villain , if thou com'st ! Was ever Jew tormented as I am ? To have a shag-rag knave to come [ force from me ] Three hundred crowns , and then five hundred crowns ! Well ; I must seek a means to rid [ 166 ] 'em all , And presently ; for in his villanyHe will tell all he knows , and I shall die for't.I have it : I will in some disguise go see the slave , And how the villain revels with my gold. [ Exit. ] Enter BELLAMIRA , [ 167 ] ITHAMORE , and PILIA-BORZA .
I 'll pledge thee , love , and therefore drink it off .
Say'st thou me so ? have at it ! and do you hear ? [ Whispers to her . ]
Go to , it shall be so .
Of [ 168 ] that condition I will drink it up : Here 's to thee .
[ 169 ] Nay , I 'll have all or none .
There , if thou lov'st me , do not leave a drop .
Love thee ! fill me three glasses .
Three and fifty dozen : I 'll pledge thee.PILIA-BORZA. Knavely spoke , and like a knight-at-arms .
Hey , Rivo Castiliano ! [ 170 ] a man 's a man .
Now to the Jew .
Ha ! to the Jew ; and send me money he [ 171 ] were best.PILIA-BORZA. What wouldst thou do , if he should send thee none ?
Do nothing : but I know what I know ; he 's a murderer .
I had not thought he had been so brave a man .
You knew Mathias and the governor 's son ; he and Ikilled 'em both , and yet never touched 'em.PILIA-BORZA. O , bravely done !
I carried the broth that poisoned the nuns ; and heand I , snicle hand too fast , strangled a friar. [ 172 ]
You two alone ?
We two ; and 't was never known , nor never shall be for me.PILIA-BORZA. This shall with me unto the governor. [ Aside to BELLAMIRA . ]
And fit it should : but first let 's ha ' more gold. -- [ Aside to PILIA-BORZA. ] Come , gentle Ithamore , lie in my lap .
Love me little , love me long : let music rumble , Whilst I in thy incony [ 173 ] lap do tumble.Enter BARABAS , disguised as a French musician , with a lute , and a nosegay in his hat .
A French musician ! -- Come , let 's hear your skill .
Must tuna my lute for sound , twang , twang , first .
Wilt drink , Frenchman ? here 's to thee with a -- Pox onthis drunken hiccup !
Gramercy , monsieur .
Prithee , Pilia-Borza , bid the fiddler give me theposy in his hat there.PILIA-BORZA. Sirrah , you must give my mistress your posy .
A votre commandement , madame. [ Giving nosegay . ]
How sweet , my Ithamore , the flowers smell !
Like thy breath , sweetheart ; no violet like 'em.PILIA-BORZA. Foh ! methinks they stink like a hollyhock. [ 174 ]
So , now I am reveng 'd upon 'em all : The scent thereof was death ; I poison 'd it. [ Aside . ]
Play , fiddler , or I 'll cut your cat 's guts into chitterlings .
Pardonnez moi , be no in tune yet : so , now , now all be in .
Give him a crown , and fill me out more wine.PILIA-BORZA. There 's two crowns for thee : play. [ Giving money . ]
How liberally the villain gives me mine own gold ! [ Aside , and then plays. ] PILIA-BORZA. Methinks he fingers very well .
So did you when you stole my gold. [ Aside. ] PILIA-BORZA. How swift he runs !
You run swifter when you threw my gold out of my window. [ Aside . ]
Musician , hast been in Malta long ?
Two , three , four month , madam .
Dost not know a Jew , one Barabas ?
Very mush : monsieur , you no be his man ? PILIA-BORZA. His man !
I scorn the peasant : tell him so .
He knows it already. [ Aside . ]
'T is a strange thing of that Jew , he lives uponpickled grasshoppers and sauced mushrooms. [ 175 ]
What a slave 's this ! the governor feeds not as I do. [ Aside . ]
He never put on clean shirt since he was circumcised .
O rascal ! I change myself twice a-day. [ Aside . ]
The hat he wears , Judas left under the elder when hehanged himself. [ 176 ]
'T was sent me for a present from the Great Cham. [ Aside. ] PILIA-BORZA. A nasty [ 177 ] slave he is. -- Whither now , fiddler ?
Pardonnez moi , monsieur ; me [ 178 ] be no well.PILIA-BORZA. Farewell , fiddler [ Exit BARABAS. ] One letter moreto the Jew .
Prithee , sweet love , one more , and write it sharp .
No , I 'll send by word of mouth now. -- Bid him deliver thee a thousand crowns , by the same tokenthat the nuns loved rice , that Friar Barnardine slept in hisown clothes ; any of 'em will do it.PILIA-BORZA. Let me alone to urge it , now I know the meaning .
The meaning has a meaning. Come , let 's in : To undo a Jew is charity , and not sin. [ Exeunt. ] ACT V.Enter FERNEZE , [ 179 ] KNIGHTS , MARTIN DEL BOSCO , and OFFICERS .
Now , gentlemen , betake you to your arms , And see that Malta be well fortified ; And it behoves you to be resolute ; For Calymath , having hover 'd here so long , Will win the town , or die before the walls.FIRST KNIGHT. And die he shall ; for we will never yield.Enter BELLAMIRA and PILIA-BORZA .
O , bring us to the governor !
Away with her ! she is a courtezan .
Whate'er I am , yet , governor , hear me speak : I bring thee news by whom thy son was slain : Mathias did it not ; it was the Jew.PILIA-BORZA. Who , besides the slaughter of these gentlemen , Poison 'd his own daughter and the nuns , Strangled a friar , and I know not whatMischief beside .
Had we but proof of this -- --
Strong proof , my lord : his man 's now at my lodging , That was his agent ; he 'll confess it all .
Go fetch him [ 180 ] straight [ Exeunt OFFICERS ] .I always fear 'd that Jew.Re-enter OFFICERS with BARABAS and ITHAMORE .
I 'll go alone ; dogs , do not hale me thus .
Nor me neither ; I can not out-run you , constable. -- O , my belly !
One dram of powder more had made all sure : What a damn 'd slave was I ! [ Aside . ]
Make fires , heat irons , let the rack be fetch'd.FIRST KNIGHT. Nay , stay , my lord ; 't may be he will confess .
Confess ! what mean you , lords ? who should confess ?
Thou and thy Turk ; 't was that slew my son .
Guilty , my lord , I confess. Your son and Mathiaswere both contracted unto Abigail : [ he ] forged a counterfeitchallenge .
Who carried that challenge ?
I carried it , I confess ; but who writ it ? marry , even he thatstrangled Barnardine , poisoned the nuns and his own daughter .
Away with him ! his sight is death to me .
For what , you men of Malta ? hear me speak.She is a courtezan , and he a thief , And he my bondman : let me have law ; For none of this can prejudice my life .
Once more , away with him ! -- You shall have law .
Devils , do your worst ! -- I [ 'll ] live in spite of you. -- [ Aside. ] As these have spoke , so be it to their souls ! -- I hope the poison 'd flowers will work anon. [ Aside. ] [ Exeunt OFFICERS with BARABAS and ITHAMORE ; BELLAMIRA , and PILIA-BORZA. ] Enter KATHARINE .
Was my Mathias murder 'd by the Jew ? Ferneze , 't was thy son that murder 'd him .
Be patient , gentle madam : it was he ; He forg 'd the daring challenge made them fight .
Where is the Jew ? where is that murderer ?
In prison , till the law has pass 'd on him.Re-enter FIRST OFFICER.FIRST OFFICER. My lord , the courtezan and her man are dead ; So is the Turk and Barabas the Jew .
Dead ! FIRST OFFICER. Dead , my lord , and here they bring his body.MARTIN DEL BOSCO. This sudden death of his is very strange.Re-enter OFFICERS , carrying BARABAS as dead .
Wonder not at it , sir ; the heavens are just ; Their deaths were like their lives ; then think not of 'em. -- Since they are dead , let them be buried : For the Jew 's body , throw that o'er the walls , To be a prey for vultures and wild beasts. -- So , now away and fortify the town.Exeunt all , leaving BARABAS on the floor. [ 181 ]
[ rising ] What , all alone ! well fare , sleepy drink ! I 'll be reveng 'd on this accursed town ; For by my means Calymath shall enter in : I 'll help to slay their children and their wives , To fire the churches , pull their houses down , Take my goods too , and seize upon my lands.I hope to see the governor a slave , And , rowing in a galley , whipt to death.Enter CALYMATH , BASSOES , [ 182 ] and TURKS .
Whom have we there ? a spy ?
Yes , my good lord , one that can spy a placeWhere you may enter , and surprize the town : My name is Barabas ; I am a Jew .
Art thou that Jew whose goods we heard were soldFor tribute-money ?
The very same , my lord : And since that time they have hir 'd a slave , my man , To accuse me of a thousand villanies : I was imprisoned , but scap [ ' ] d their hands .
Didst break prison ?
No , no : I drank of poppy and cold mandrake juice ; And being asleep , belike they thought me dead , And threw me o'er the walls : so , or how else , The Jew is here , and rests at your command .
'T was bravely done : but tell me , Barabas , Canst thou , as thou report'st , make Malta ours ?
Fear not , my lord ; for here , against the trench , [ 183 ] The rock is hollow , and of purpose digg 'd , To make a passage for the running streamsAnd common channels [ 184 ] of the city.Now , whilst you give assault unto the walls , I 'll lead five hundred soldiers through the vault , And rise with them i ' the middle of the town , Open the gates for you to enter in ; And by this means the city is your own .
If this be true , I 'll make thee governor .
And , if it be not true , then let me die .
Thou'st doom 'd thyself. -- Assault it presently. [ Exeunt. ] Alarums within. Enter CALYMATH , [ 185 ] BASSOES , TURKS , andBARABAS ; with FERNEZE and KNIGHTS prisoners .
Now vail [ 186 ] your pride , you captive Christians , And kneel for mercy to your conquering foe : Now where 's the hope you had of haughty Spain ? Ferneze , speak ; had it not been much betterTo kept [ 187 ] thy promise than be thus surpris 'd ?
What should I say ? we are captives , and must yield .
Ay , villains , you must yield , and under Turkish yokesShall groaning bear the burden of our ire : -- And , Barabas , as erst we promis 'd thee , For thy desert we make thee governor ; Use them at thy discretion .
Thanks , my lord .
O fatal day , to fall into the handsOf such a traitor and unhallow 'd Jew ! What greater misery could heaven inflict ?
'T is our command : -- and , Barabas , we give , To guard thy person , these our Janizaries : Entreat [ 188 ] them well , as we have used thee. -- And now , brave bassoes , [ 189 ] come ; we 'll walk aboutThe ruin 'd town , and see the wreck we made. -- Farewell , brave Jew , farewell , great Barabas !
May all good fortune follow Calymath ! [ Exeunt CALYMATH and BASSOES. ] And now , as entrance to our safety , To prison with the governor and theseCaptains , his consorts and confederates .
O villain ! heaven will be reveng 'd on thee .
Away ! no more ; let him not trouble me. [ Exeunt TURKS with FERNEZE and KNIGHTS. ] Thus hast thou gotten , [ 190 ] by thy policy , No simple place , no small authority : I now am governor of Malta ; true , -- But Malta hates me , and , in hating me , My life 's in danger ; and what boots it thee , Poor Barabas , to be the governor , Whenas [ 191 ] thy life shall be at their command ? No , Barabas , this must be look 'd into ; And , since by wrong thou gott'st authority , Maintain it bravely by firm policy ; At least , unprofitably lose it not ; For he that liveth in authority , And neither gets him friends nor fills his bags , Lives like the ass that Aesop speaketh of , That labours with a load of bread and wine , And leaves it off to snap on thistle-tops : But Barabas will be more circumspect.Begin betimes ; Occasion 's bald behind : Slip not thine opportunity , for fear too lateThou seek'st for much , but canst not compass it. -- Within here ! [ 192 ] Enter FERNEZE , with a GUARD .
My lord ?
Ay , LORD ; thus slaves will learn.Now , governor , -- stand by there , wait within , -- [ Exeunt GUARD. ] This is the reason that I sent for thee : Thou seest thy life and Malta 's happinessAre at my arbitrement ; and BarabasAt his discretion may dispose of both : Now tell me , governor , and plainly too , What think'st thou shall become of it and thee ?
This , Barabas ; since things are in thy power , I see no reason but of Malta 's wreck , Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty : Nor fear I death , nor will I flatter thee .
Governor , good words ; be not so furious'Tis not thy life which can avail me aught ; Yet you do live , and live for me you shall : And as for Malta 's ruin , think you not'Twere slender policy for BarabasTo dispossess himself of such a place ? For sith , [ 193 ] as once you said , within this isle , In Malta here , that I have got my goods , And in this city still have had success , And now at length am grown your governor , Yourselves shall see it shall not be forgot ; For , as a friend not known but in distress , I 'll rear up Malta , now remediless .
Will Barabas recover Malta 's loss ? Will Barabas be good to Christians ?
What wilt thou give me , governor , to procureA dissolution of the slavish bandsWherein the Turk hath yok 'd your land and you ? What will you give me if I render youThe life of Calymath , surprise his men , And in an out-house of the city shutHis soldiers , till I have consum 'd 'em all with fire ? What will you give him that procureth this ?
Do but bring this to pass which thou pretendest , Deal truly with us as thou intimatest , And I will send amongst the citizens , And by my letters privately procureGreat sums of money for thy recompense : Nay , more , do this , and live thou governor still .
Nay , do thou this , Ferneze , and be free : Governor , I enlarge thee ; live with me ; Go walk about the city , see thy friends : Tush , send not letters to 'em ; go thyself , And let me see what money thou canst make : Here is my hand that I 'll set Malta free ; And thus we cast [ 194 ] it : to a solemn feastI will invite young Selim Calymath , Where be thou present , only to performOne stratagem that I 'll impart to thee , Wherein no danger shall betide thy life , And I will warrant Malta free for ever .
Here is my hand ; believe me , Barabas , I will be there , and do as thou desirest.When is the time ?
Governor , presently ; For Calymath , when he hath view 'd the town , Will take his leave , and sail toward Ottoman .
Then will I , Barabas , about this coin , And bring it with me to thee in the evening .
Do so ; but fail not : now farewell , Ferneze : -- [ Exit FERNEZE. ] And thus far roundly goes the business : Thus , loving neither , will I live with both , Making a profit of my policy ; And he from whom my most advantage comes , Shall be my friend.This is the life we Jews are us 'd to lead ; And reason too , for Christians do the like.Well , now about effecting this device ; First , to surprise great Selim 's soldiers , And then to make provision for the feast , That at one instant all things may be done : My policy detests prevention.To what event my secret purpose drives , I know ; and they shall witness with their lives. [ Exeunt. ] Enter CALYMATH and BASSOES. [ 195 ]
Thus have we view 'd the city , seen the sack , And caus 'd the ruins to be new-repair 'd , Which with our bombards ' shot and basilisk [ s ] [ 196 ] We rent in sunder at our entry : And , now I see the situation , And how secure this conquer 'd island stands , Environ 'd with the Mediterranean sea , Strong-countermin 'd with other petty isles , And , toward Calabria , [ 197 ] back 'd by Sicily ( Where Syracusian Dionysius reign 'd ) , Two lofty turrets that command the town , I wonder how it could be conquer 'd thus.Enter a MESSENGER .
From Barabas , Malta 's governor , I bringA message unto mighty Calymath : Hearing his sovereign was bound for sea , To sail to Turkey , to great Ottoman , He humbly would entreat your majestyTo come and see his homely citadel , And banquet with him ere thou leav'st the isle .
To banquet with him in his citadel ! I fear me , messenger , to feast my trainWithin a town of war so lately pillag 'd , Will be too costly and too troublesome : Yet would I gladly visit Barabas , For well has Barabas deserv 'd of us .
Selim , for that , thus saith the governor , -- That he hath in [ his ] store a pearl so big , So precious , and withal so orient , As , be it valu 'd but indifferently , The price thereof will serve to entertainSelim and all his soldiers for a month ; Therefore he humbly would entreat your highnessNot to depart till he has feasted you .
I can not feast my men in Malta-walls , Except he place his tables in the streets .
Know , Selim , that there is a monasteryWhich standeth as an out-house to the town ; There will he banquet them ; but thee at home , With all thy bassoes and brave followers .
Well , tell the governor we grant his suit ; We 'll in this summer-evening feast with him .
I shall , my lord. [ Exit . ]
And now , bold bassoes , let us to our tents , And meditate how we may grace us best , To solemnize our governor 's great feast. [ Exeunt. ] Enter FERNEZE , [ 198 ] KNIGHTS , and MARTIN DEL BOSCO .
In this , my countrymen , be rul 'd by me : Have special care that no man sally forthTill you shall hear a culverin discharg'dBy him that bears the linstock , [ 199 ] kindled thus ; Then issue out and come to rescue me , For happily I shall be in distress , Or you released of this servitude.FIRST KNIGHT. Rather than thus to live as Turkish thralls , What will we not adventure ?
On , then ; be gone .
Farewell , grave governor. [ Exeunt , on one side , KNIGHTS and MARTIN DEL BOSCO ; on the other , FERNEZE. ] Enter , above , [ 200 ] BARABAS , with a hammer , very busy ; and CARPENTERS .
How stand the cords ? how hang these hinges ? fast ? Are all the cranes and pulleys sure ? FIRST CARPENTER. [ 201 ] All fast .
Leave nothing loose , all levell 'd to my mind.Why , now I see that you have art , indeed : There , carpenters , divide that gold amongst you ; [ Giving money. ] Go , swill in bowls of sack and muscadine ; Down to the cellar , taste of all my wines.FIRST CARPENTER. We shall , my lord , and thank you. [ Exeunt CARPENTERS . ]
And , if you like them , drink your fill and die ; For , so I live , perish may all the world ! Now , Selim Calymath , return me wordThat thou wilt come , and I am satisfied.Enter MESSENGER.Now , sirrah ; what , will he come ?
He will ; and has commanded all his menTo come ashore , and march through Malta-streets , That thou mayst feast them in thy citadel .
Then now are all things as my wish would have 'em ; There wanteth nothing but the governor 's pelf ; And see , he brings it.Enter FERNEZE.Now , governor , the sum ?
With free consent , a hundred thousand pounds .
Pounds say'st thou , governor ? well , since it is no more , I 'll satisfy myself with that ; nay , keep it still , For , if I keep not promise , trust not me : And , governor , now partake my policy.First , for his army , they are sent before , Enter 'd the monastery , and underneathIn several places are field-pieces pitch 'd , Bombards , whole barrels full of gunpowder , That on the sudden shall dissever it , And batter all the stones about their ears , Whence none can possibly escape alive : Now , as for Calymath and his consorts , Here have I made a dainty gallery , The floor whereof , this cable being cut , Doth fall asunder , so that it doth sinkInto a deep pit past recovery.Here , hold that knife ; and , when thou seest he comes , [ Throws down a knife. ] And with his bassoes shall be blithely set , A warning-piece shall be shot off [ 202 ] from the tower , To give thee knowledge when to cut the cord , And fire the house. Say , will not this be brave ?
O , excellent ! here , hold thee , Barabas ; I trust thy word ; take what I promis 'd thee .
No , governor ; I 'll satisfy thee first ; Thou shalt not live in doubt of any thing.Stand close , for here they come. [ FERNEZE retires. ] Why , is not thisA kingly kind of trade , to purchase townsBy treachery , and sell 'em by deceit ? Now tell me , worldlings , underneath the sun [ 203 ] If greater falsehood ever has been done ? Enter CALYMATH and BASSOES .
Come , my companion-bassoes : see , I pray , How busy Barabas is there aboveTo entertain us in his gallery : Let us salute him. -- Save thee , Barabas !
Welcome , great Calymath !
How the slave jeers at him ! [ Aside . ]
Will't please thee , mighty Selim Calymath , To ascend our homely stairs ?
Ay , Barabas. -- Come , bassoes , ascend. [ 204 ]
[ coming forward ] Stay , Calymath ; For I will shew thee greater courtesyThan Barabas would have afforded thee .
[ within ] Sound a charge there ! [ A charge sounded within : FERNEZE cuts the cord ; the floorof the gallery gives way , and BARABAS falls into a caldronplaced in a pit.Enter KNIGHTS and MARTIN DEL BOSCO. [ 205 ]
How now ! what means this ?
Help , help me , Christians , help !
See , Calymath ! this was devis 'd for thee .
Treason , treason ! bassoes , fly !
No , Selim , do not fly : See his end first , and fly then if thou canst .
O , help me , Selim ! help me , Christians ! Governor , why stand you all so pitiless ?
Should I in pity of thy plaints or thee , Accursed Barabas , base Jew , relent ? No , thus I 'll see thy treachery repaid , But wish thou hadst behav 'd thee otherwise .
You will not help me , then ?
No , villain , no .
And , villains , know you can not help me now. -- Then , Barabas , breathe forth thy latest fate , And in the fury of thy torments striveTo end thy life with resolution. -- Know , governor , 't was I that slew thy son , -- I fram 'd the challenge that did make them meet : Know , Calymath , I aim 'd thy overthrow : And , had I but escap 'd this stratagem , I would have brought confusion on you all , Damn 'd Christian [ 206 ] dogs , and Turkish infidels ! But now begins the extremity of heatTo pinch me with intolerable pangs : Die , life ! fly , soul ! tongue , curse thy fill , and die ! [ Dies . ]
Tell me , you Christians , what doth this portend ?
This train [ 207 ] he laid to have entrapp 'd thy life ; Now , Selim , note the unhallow 'd deeds of Jews ; Thus he determin 'd to have handled thee , But I have rather chose to save thy life .
Was this the banquet he prepar 'd for us ? Let 's hence , lest further mischief be pretended. [ 208 ]
Nay , Selim , stay ; for , since we have thee here , We will not let thee part so suddenly : Besides , if we should let thee go , all 's one , For with thy galleys couldst thou not get hence , Without fresh men to rig and furnish them .
Tush , governor , take thou no care for that ; My men are all aboard , And do attend my coming there by this .
Why , heard'st thou not the trumpet sound a charge ?
Yes , what of that ?
Why , then the house was fir 'd , Blown up , and all thy soldiers massacred .
O , monstrous treason !
A Jew 's courtesy ; For he that did by treason work our fall , By treason hath deliver 'd thee to us : Know , therefore , till thy father hath made goodThe ruins done to Malta and to us , Thou canst not part ; for Malta shall be freed , Or Selim ne'er return to Ottoman .
Nay , rather , Christians , let me go to Turkey , In person there to mediate [ 209 ] your peace : To keep me here will naught advantage you .
Content thee , Calymath , here thou must stay , And live in Malta prisoner ; for come all [ 210 ] the worldTo rescue thee , so will we guard us now , As sooner shall they drink the ocean dry , Than conquer Malta , or endanger us.So , march away ; and let due praise be givenNeither to Fate nor Fortune , but to Heaven. [ Exeunt . ]
P. ) . ] [ Footnote 91 : Enter BELLAMIRA : She appears , we may suppose , in a verandaor open portico of her house ( that the scene is not the interiorof the house , is proved by what follows ) . ] [ Footnote 92 : Enter MATHIAS .
P. ) . ] [ Footnote 132 : untold : i.e. uncounted. -- Old ed. `` vnsold. '' ] [ Footnote 133 : BARABAS. This is mere frailty : brethren , be content. -- Friar Barnardine , go you with Ithamore : You know my mind ; let me alone with him. ] FRIAR JACOMO. Why does he go to thy house ? let him be goneOld ed. thus ; '' BAR. This is meere frailty , brethren , be content.Fryar Barnardine goe you with Ithimore .
You know my mind , let me alone with him ; Why does he goe to thy house , let him begone. '' ] [ Footnote 134 : the Turk : `` Meaning Ithamore. '' COLLIER ( apud Dodsley 's
P. ) . Compare the last line but one of Barabas 's next speech. ] [ Footnote 135 : covent : i.e. convent. ] [ Footnote 136 : Therefore 't is not requisite he should live : Lest thereader should suspect that the author wrote , '' Therefore 't is requisite he should not live , '' I may observe that we have had before ( p. 152 , first col. ) a similar form of expression , -- '' It is not necessary I be seen. '' ] [ Footnote 137 : fair : See note ||| , p. 15. ( '15 ' sic. ) ( note ||| , p. 13 , The First Part of Tamburlaine the Great : ) '' In fair , & c. : Here `` FAIR '' is to be considered as a
JEW OF MALTA , '' I 'll feast you , lodge you , give you FAIR words , And , after that , '' & c. '' ] [ Footnote 138 : shall be done : Here a change of scene is supposed , to theinterior of Barabas 's house. ] [ Footnote 139 : Friar , awake : Here , most probably , Barabas drew a curtain , and discovered the sleeping Friar. ] [ Footnote 140 : have : Old ed. `` saue. '' ] [ Footnote 141 : What time o ' night is't now , sweet Ithamore ?
Towards one : Might be adduced , among otherpassages , to shew that the modern editors are right when theyprint in Shakespeare 's KING JOHN. act iii. sc. 3 , '' If the midnight bellDid , with his iron tongue and brazen mouth , Sound ONE into the drowsy ear of NIGHT , '' & c. ] [ Footnote 142 : Enter FRIAR JACOMO : The scene is now before Barabas'shouse , -- the audience having had to SUPPOSE that the body ofBarnardine , which Ithamore had set upright , was standingoutside the door. ] [ Footnote 143 : proceed : Seems to be used here as equivalent to -- succeed. ] [ Footnote 144 : on 's : i.e. of his. ] [ Footnote 145 : Enter BELLAMIRA , & c. : The scene , as in p. 160 , a verandaor open portico of Bellamira 's house. ( p. 160 , this play : ) '' Enter BELLAMIRA. ( 91 )
Since this town was besieg 'd , '' etc. ] [ Footnote 146 : tall : Which our early dramatists generally use in thesense of -- bold , brave ( see note  , p. 161 ) , [ i.e. note 94 : ishere perhaps equivalent to -- handsome. ( `` Tall or SEMELY. '' PROMPT .
ed. 1499. ) ] [ Footnote 147 : neck-verse : i.e. the verse ( generally the beginning of the51st Psalm , MISERERE MEI , & c. ) read by a criminal to entitle himto benefit of clergy. ] [ Footnote 148 : of : i.e. on. ] [ Footnote 149 : exercise : i.e. sermon , preaching. ] [ Footnote 150 : with a muschatoes : i.e. with a pair of mustachios. Themodern editors print `` with MUSTACHIOS , '' and `` with a MUSTACHIOS '' : but compare , -- '' My Tuskes more stiffe than are a Cats MUSCHATOES . ''
P. ) proposes to read `` hand TO FIST '' . Gilchrist ( ibid. ) observes , `` a snicle is a north-country word for a noose , andwhen a person is hanged , they say he is snicled. '' See too , in V. SNICKLE , Forby 's VOC. OF EAST ANGLIA , and the CRAVEN
For this E-Text version of the book , the footnotes have beenconsolidated at the end of the play.Numbering of the footnotes has been changed , and each footnoteis given a unique identity in the form [ XXX ] .CHANGES TO THE TEXT : Character names were expanded. For Example , BARABAS was BARA. , FERNEZE was FERN. , etc.End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Jew of Malta , by Christopher Marlowe*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JEW OF MALTA ******** This file should be named 901-8.txt or 901-8.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
