errr not sure if I'll be able to come out tonight lol I be broke ass . Haha I was hoping I'd get per  
I just wanna get all the way wasted tonite ! no seriously !	 
So its ending soon  been a great episode to bad we have to wait till monday for a new one	 
Cali . lmao More snow on friday and saturday ? Really ? 
Baltzar , marcos , jalen walked me home today ! Cause I have a stocker , he followed for 2 days 0	 
Bitch I want some . Tell ray to come get a bitch tomorrow shit .	 
If God did a random inspection of your life today , would you be able to pass ?	 
I hope you enjoyed the wood chairs and wood decorations  lovely to hang with you and our gang tonight in the woods xx	 
Whenever I hear ' Oh What a Night !  ' now I can't help but giggle a bit . Jersey Boys broke me .	 
Do you like Karaoke ? Tonight and every Thursday Aura Ultra Lounge will have Ladies Karaoke 7-9pm !	 
" Don't Hold Your Breath " final version by premiere this Sunday on BBC'S Radio 1 . Can't wait !	 
Just saw homeless disheveled man at McDonalds 1st reaction was to ignore , then remembered that 's also the face of God . Things changed .	 
maybe . Trying new stuff for dinner tonight so I will devote some time to my kitchen and then watch Red while eating .	 
I have , and do like it . We actually interviewed Prezi back in September 
I mailed 12 letters to legislators today 11 thank yous and one I AM VERY DISAPPOINTED .	 
Very happy today ! Its almost the weekend and to make my day even better got a brand new cell phone ! :D Tell me . 
yeah it 's some craic now I must say . Some place to head out , some night life .	 
Morning~still sleepy . My dog woke me up .	 
Ugh . Someone peed in the lift last night or early morning .	 
Looking forward to sharing ideas ! Have a great night .	 
Tonite ! Can't wit to see more of the funniest person in da world 
Make lots of money today promoting this Great Marketing Tool 
I got the link to Scotty McCreery 's American Idol audition the other night . I'll definitely be pulling for him ! htt .	 
lmfao just got mine today	 
Today was so fucking fun . I swear I fucks with the coolest people . 
hey are u still interested in picking up my 1800-2200 tomorrow night ?!? I would appreciate it !	 
it is pretty vital that i know the answer ! What time for tomorrow ?	 
Me too . But relieved too as a weight got lifted off my team at work today . Is it Friday yet ? So absolutely exhausted .	 
Loved seeing take over the weather report this morning . Watch out .	 
LOL glad to hear things worked out for you today ! Unruly huh ? I shoveled snow	 
I miss you I'm sending a picture of tomorrow I'm going to connect on Twitter at 3:00 pm , I will check the twitter tonight and	 
okay night scamps and scampettes	 
Met a true gentleman on the train today .	 
Jersey shore tonight watching it with my baby 	 
i looked so cool in my dream last night .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Brink release date announced - May 17th in North America , May 20th in Europe 
I'm a mess I don't complain . I hate the sun , I like the rain . I get dressed up to stay at home . I like it more when I'm alone .	 
good morning my sweetie boO have a great day~ GBU	 
Check it peeps . Feb 12th San Jacinto CA We on n poppin wit n bottle service n Boom Boom Room Get a bar .	 
Luke 6:12 One of those days Jesus went out to a mountainside to pray , and spent the night praying to God	 
i guess im goin out tonight	 
Arts and Culture - Google Books Result 22 Mar 2010 . Strings magazine is looking to add 
Today is my birthday , Can you give the best present of my life ? It 's just answer me !	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
" That 's why he sings so good . Because he 's singing to you ." -Steven Tyler , making my cry from last night 's Idol !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
How can I love u tonight	 
something about a person not leaving your arms tonight , or something about a person that walks the night .	 
Can't stand this class today .	 
whats the letter day tomorrow ?	 
so today me nd my new crush broke up lol . Ugh . Im so heart broken	 
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
Fisherspooner DJ set in Hollywood tomorrow night . Might check it out .	 
Sleeping on an airport floor is no fun , but it reminds me how thankful I should be to have a bed every other night of t .	 
everytime i tweet something like " today sucks ", a lot of you agree . and that makes me sad . we need to make better day .	 
Reason . tv Porkers of the Month for January 2011 
Shall let these kids excel above me for the geog test today . I'm so conceited .	 
I like wearing ruffled aprons when I cook , makes me feel like June Cleaver . 
we said either applebees or cheddars but honestly I'd eat bk right now I'm so hungry . Can I wear pjs ? Cause mon look all cute n shyt	 
Do u think tht we could convince mrs baxter and mrs thornton to dance in the morning ? (( 
Ok im not so nervous as I was before but on monday I know my nervousness will come back	 
i know ha its clearly all about FB tonight XD	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
just cancel school tomorrow i don't see any point going to school on a Friday	 
Good Evening everyone ! I hope that you are having a relaxing evening . Is anyone attending college or University ?. 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Not going for that job , even tho they offered a 2nd interview - it 's a con !	 
Let 's hope Amar'e has a great game tonight and win . I got a story to write about with him being an All-Star starter .	 
Yay , it 's Friday ! What 's on for the weekend ? We hear the sun may be making an appearance . are your legs ready to be seen in shorts ? ; )	 
Ok , 1st go to the , then click on . It should be on the right-hand side under your name stuff .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Messaged you back ! Hit us back asap so we can get that sent out tomorrow for you !	 
No swimming today . 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Have a nice day kak :D It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
morning din bro 	 
Supernatural NOT returning tomorrow night . Stay tuned for details	 
mbak mon , aku request lhooo	 
" Gun control always fails to stop crime . " jo .	 
Jummah Mubarak insha'Allah today will be a great day 
And on that note i'm going sleep . Night !	 
I have a box and folder full of old 1st and 2nd Gen Pokemon cards . Once a year me and my brother build decks and battle with them	 
Charlie Sheen Rushed to the Hospital Amber Belus Charlie Sheen was rushed to the hospital this morning At . 
Best mile time today 	 
sad not to be getting arcade fire tickets tomorrow . - i wish i had someone to go with . 
don't y'all have game Friday too	 
Chaz is hilarious ! This morning he said he walked out of his room naked and forgot his cleaning lady was there !	 
Oh Ya ? well I may need to borrow your helmet . for that one ?!? 0/ . / It wouldn't fit you .	 
getting beat on the boards , still leading 15-11 after 2nd media break .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
One fine day on Friday . Ready for weekend !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
How do you rate your current lifestyle ? Take the today ! 
Hey baby ! How are you ? That 's cool ! I'm going to Music as a Weapon concert at Mohegan tomorrow night 
A mani and pedi is just what I needed today !	 
When would you like to be wed ?	 
what would be the easiest ever way to meet you i nearly did last night but people pushed me away from the barrier  xx	 
lol Sorry . You've got to pick one .  But I'd put up a pic of me in a Barca jersey anyway . Just not on the 16th . 	 
Great night on H street , first meeting with , talking streetcars and now talking with fell .	 
So I really wanna get my nails done tomorrow .	 
I couldn't sleep . It 's not because of coffee ; it 's because of insomnia . I was up all night thinking about coffee .	 
Well , it seems we'll have an extra day in Pittsburgh  for a heavily Locke Key promo agenda ! Stay tuned for news .	 
your excluded from steak night .	 
Tiger shot 3-under today in his season opener . No , ESPN , Jimmer Fredette is not in this tournament .	 
Jordan Taylor is now in the Camaro . Jordan 's 1st lap is a 2:04 . 588 .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
In atlanta . too excited about this battle of the bands on Saturday ! Ima dance my axx off for my momma ! Lol I love her ! 
Unfortunately , actually fortunately for most of you . lol , their is only 1 of me . and I am booked on September . .	 
School District of Philadelphia has cancelled school for tomorrow . Thank you . What will am I going to do ? Lesson Plan for next week !	 
I don't want Saturday to come cause of the SAT prep class .	 
No paycheck tomorrow :/ but I'll get about $200 next Friday :D	 
Kpkb early in the morning for what . No school means no school , what 's the big deal ? = . =	 
So my first class tomorrow is at 9 my next class ain't till 2 
Snow again next Tuesday and Weds ? I sure as hell hope we get a nice spring and summer .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
today was a good day  i sound like ice cube haha	 
Ugh , really I thought it was earlier today .	 
Word out of Japan that Horse of the Year Buena Vista may target the Dubai World Cup , without a prep race . You go girl ! .	 
I don't know about this PA Aggies meeting tonight . I mean , it 's at 8:30 and it 's cold outside . and I gotta walk .	 
Chemistry tomorrow . I will never be ready for this .	 
" I thought teaching are you was 1st tho " What ?	 
Let the fun and games begin , she is vain and broken in Skin is cold and white . Such a lovely lonely night~	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
I'm pulling an all nighter . Idc if we have school tomorrow or not .	 
Visiting the rainforest today thanks to Cal Academy . Very quiet day people wise we are coming back tonite for a party !	 
Yet another study shows that berry compounds may improve blood pressure . Harvard study says it the anthocyanins 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight !	 
Today marks the anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau , the largest Nazi death camp . 
Night mate , see you in the morning	 
i don't feel like going to school tomorrow .	 
Right I am off to Bedfordshire ! Night all x	 
I used to pass the homeless woman on last night 's The Daily Show , Cora Dudley , when I worked downtown this past fall . Odd , but humbling .	 
If the information blackout is not lifted before the Friday prayers , then you must say a prayer for Egyptians . God .	 
Today at A newspaper , Jamie Siddons said , he finally found a PP solution for our team . Guess who they are ?. 
i woke up in the morning and bumped into some weirdos in twitter -_-	 
Read today There are only one or two issues vocal pro-lifers seem to be upset about .	 
who 's coming to see me in Syracuse , NY at the Westcott Theatre on Tuesday  with Mickey Factz ,. .	 
Team Heat vs . Knicks tonight . hmm , who takin the win followers ?	 
Edward Sharp coming over in March . Leeds is not far from London is it ?!	 
Trying to find a place to crash tonight . Idc if we have school or not tomorrow . Im not going .	 
Don't forget tonight 's Tribune debate at 7pm on 
Miramar police very active tonight .	 
What 's up with only giving Nashville ONE hour tonight ? Why not 2 ? We're Music City after al !	 
Screens can provide useful directional flow . 
Can see Mt . Adams from the hill today	 
Home stretch ! About to head home for the night , then back for tomorrow 's 6PM !	 
is finally skiing tomorrow . Which means he needs to dig up all his gear from the attic .	 
Lol , I was on a rower in the gym today , and then ' The Flood ' came on my iPod . How amazing ;D lol	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home from wo ." and got Part 2-RUN ! Try it 
" If you don't make a decision now , they both may die ."	 
And yes , I may , meet a million pretty girls that know my name . But don't you worry , no , cuz you have my heart 3 -Worldwide	 
I hate February weather . Its the Tuesday of the year .	 
Fuck 2nd quarter . lts nothing more l can do to help my grade so l'll just be working towards 3rd quarter .	 
So tomorrow after school softball . Join if youd like .  Bring your glove spread the word . Please thanks .	 
back a week today Carol miss you more !	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
thank fuck its friday .	 
Today would be so perfect if there 's no school .	 
new challenge march in place for fifteen minutes . Not epic but still somewhat difficult .	 
Well scinto IS black ! LOL Wtf Alhambra tripping big black balls ! It called my mom saying I didn't go to my 1st hour !	 
Defense will beat the Heat tonight .	 
We need the world to know that the govt of Egypt has shut down Internet , blocked SMS , ahead of planned protests tomorr .	 
i didnt do any homework , i'll just do it in class tomorrow .	 
what are the favorite rides ? I'll be there w/ trek travel on Oct !	 
Your fantasy team just can't hang buddy . Watch LeBron go nuts tonight as well . just to top it off .	 
we may not know them	 
American Kennel Club copyrighted the 20th edition of " The Complete Dog Book " in 2006  , an official publication of the AKC .	 
oh . lol . I'm good . Tired tonight . Gotta get mommy stuff done so I can go to bed early .	 
just got back from mime practice someone text me cuz im bored and got nuthin to do tonight	 
I thought I would never see Justin Bieber on New . Music . Live . this Tuesday ! . please make my dreams come true ? 3 
same here haha what did you do today ?	 
I text you today	 
today is , then greys anatomy , then jersey shore 3 .	 
hanging out with yaz today :D	 
saw some dudes heading to the Stanley Park Pitch Putt today , almost exploded with jealously but i'll letter warm up a bit me thinks . 
Today was a bad day . I just want the weekend to come . =\	 
yes , it said it had an error connecting with twitter ? worked ok today though .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Really annoyed I missed the show today - job from hell stopped play 	 
Power has been restored . Car stuck in parking lot . Snow removal crew coming tonight .	 
hospital 2 hours away equipped for premies . Wife gets out of the hospital tomorrow . He plans on working tomorrow . They might go visit 	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
lol I was like Wtf cause I was like I had a nightmare last night n she was  
School is closed again tomorrow . Sup , 4 day weekend ?	 
Two inches of hair today and 17 tomorrow trips me out everytime	 
Im feeling a lot better today .	 
oh I'll be back Saturday we gotta go see the fam	 
Gotta do somethin productive today , been sitting around doing nothing . Gym later . yes 	 
Had a great time watching today 's chat  ( Made my day better 3	 
February is going to be a wonderful month for me .	 
God woke you up this morning to see another day ! That 's more than enough to be " Thankful " for .  .	 
Duck , weave , and knock the other guy 's block off . See what 's hot and new in Fight Night Champion . 
Good morning . Always make a total effort , even when the odds are against you . - Arnold Palmer 
Dis sum bullshit . i feel like shit . n da rest of my evening gon b shitty	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I can't come in to work today . I went skydiving over the weekend and my chute didn't open .	 
that 's gonna hurt in the morning .	 
Time to go . let the spirit of the sun , shine on everyone .  )	 
night ya all xx	 
my dad is getting me mad today ! 
seriously . i actually saw a video today and it was rather o__O	 
Feb . 20th . You know me , and you know how anxious I am to show the pictures . This is the worst part !	 
I think I may leave .	 
Hey hit me tomorrow and let 's set it up .	 
As January draws to a close , I've decided that my lesson from this month is to follow my instincts . I've done  
I'll be bound in the morning for a whole weekend , getting very drunk and watching a lot of football with 
I'm into my 3rd upgrade/fix download install on the Windows partition on my Mac . I've been away from the dark side for some time .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Nice ! Big this morning  Napkin for the day ! 
major love for my flat mate right now , typing up a full terms worth of notes for me !  maybe there is hope for tomorrow !	 
Can't wait till the get a win tonight	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
I want to keep them so bad but they're going home tomorrow . x	 
dear - im ready for taboo night ! we gotta round up some eligible bachelors lmao	 
FELLAS if you can't get her number tomorrow night at after , you just UGLY and shouldn't be going out .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
So jealous of going down to London tomorrow . but not jealous that he has to be up at 5AM 	 
nice seeing u today	 
Good Morning friends ! 
Gd morning everyone ! Wake up wake up	 
Which presentation are you looking forward to most ? At the Jan REIN workshop . This is gonna be a fantastic night 
Since I had no new takers on the " who wants to help me move " tweet , here 's a new one Who is running Oakland in March ? I am !	 
In fact , the more I read about supposedly having fun in Princes Gardens in May , I wonder how this is going to engage people 
You know , if you run for Governor , some of us may hit the road to help you	 
Yeah you right at least its friday ! and a get a early finish tomorrow so its all good haha  xx	 
My notes from today 's webinar with this morning Exec summary it was great !	 
good night ( :	 
Monday 's first day at college . need to get better first though Dx 
no school tomorrow , I love 4 day weekends ) 
is there school tomorrow ?	 
Apply for Assistant for Recruitment ! Visit www.kupanhellenic.org to get a form and submit it to the SILC office by Monday , Jan 31st at 5 pm !	 
Boy is terribly stressed today . I'm laying low . behind a pot plant*	 
returns tonight after the longest hiatus , ever .  Prepare to have your timelines full .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Is it 8am class today ?	 
I take leave 1st feb then start rest . Haven't buy new clothes and clean my room	 
Oh and BTW , i saw what im looking for . I got to the mall yesterday to find the special project and i saw it ! haha	 
i really want to see no strings attached . thats what i should have done with my day today .	 
22 points and 16 rebounds a game and Kevin Love may not make the all-star game ? Yet Gasol 's 19 and 11 is better ?	 
. that ability would have been very handy today as the semi with is starting at 3:30 am . Sadly , I've lost that skill	 
Great job today . tons of fans are pulling for you . one shot at a time man . would be sweet to see you win it and more	 
where u at tonight ?	 
Removing my capri sun from the freezer nowl	 
Selection of Specialized Carbon Tarmac/Roubaix Aluminum Allez bikes 4 rent in Solvang during March camps . Contact us for more details !	 
poor Ben manning , he was walking home from town after night out . Would have passed my house , what happened then is mystery	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
yea she bought some today	 
I'm probably gonna fail CMPS tomorrow because it 's stuck in my head . I failed mktg today thanks to We R who we R :/	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
sure I'm in ! Spending the evening with you ladies is better than being at home	 
i don't like today . I feel emo	 
tweaked them in an IM basketball game last night . you know how dudes be acting if its tryouts for the NBA or something .	 
aye i missed you today	 
Budget cuts hitting home - The Sun Chronicle Online - News 
Oh its Friday . My BIGGEST is because he 's an absolute gem . LOVE his tweets . X x	 
No need to go to la fitness tonight I just got a full workout shoveling snow	 
Man , the show tonight was frickin epic ! Props to you guys for giving us all a killer evening .	 
Best nap and shower I've ever had perfect night haha	 
Completely forgot that I work at Pub 56 tonight . I suppose I should be thankful for a job but I'm physically drained =( I need 
Haha good ! Better go to bed anyway . Early start helping my sis move house tomorrow . Night ! x	 
Amsterdam tomorrow afternoon 	 
nothing to do tonight	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
Preparing a local church for a Burns Night with Scottish Dancing . One of the best bits of living in Britain and certainly Scotland .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
I am the lizard queen ! That is all , good night . I'm actually going to school tomorrow - shocker ! 	 
Wow , I am really letting out some anger and negative emotions today . Had no idea how pissed I really was . Moving through grief is hard .	 
We need the world to know that the govt of Egypt has shut down Internet , blocked SMS , ahead of planned protests tomorr .	 
working in Photoshop to finish a few projects for my Digital Imaging class final tomorrow . And then studying for Calculus .	 
who 's celebrating my birthday wit ' me tomorrow  ? - what you doin ?	 
I thought I would never see Justin Bieber on New . Music . Live . this Tuesday ! . please make my dreams come true ? 3 
Does she feel more pressure to make the next album as a big a success as Pink Friday ?	 
And a pedo . Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Photo Oscar-nominated actress Julianne Moore was in Cambridge today to be honored  as . 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
People sometimes ask me why I have a bug up my ass about Second Life . C'mon, folks , I don't have a bug up my  
young we got school tomorrow regular time . it was fun while it lasted .	 
Is TW goofy tonight ? Can't stay followed on someone but can read their posts if I look their account up .	 
Today is my birthday , Can you give the best present of my life ? It 's just answer me !	 
Tonight is one of those nights you just get under the covers and snuggle with the sheets .	 
" I cry each night My tears for you "	 
if you'll be out hunting for Super bowl Tickets in Green Bay tomorrow for ! 
I noticed that . I was about to be all up in yo mentions this evening but you came out to play 
Delayed opening tomorrow !	 
Today is a better day . Thank God	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
tomorrow 3:30 the guy who u did the cross to and me . --- ok bro !	 
I'm gonna go to sleep now and hope my feeling is just due to lack of this . Night . Xoxo	 
where we at tonight ? ?	 
good morning too =)	 
We're givin away pair of tix to , this Sat . this for chance to win . We'll select 1 lucky .	 
I know , I am so sorry . I was in New York City yesterday I totally understand . Trust me , I do . We get ENDLESS rain !	 
the ny islanders only had 30% attendance yesterday  . They should start selling booze to underage kids . 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
dang . no skool tomorrow . well aint dat a bitch .	 
tomorrow is my chill out day	 
Let me figure this out and get it set up hopefully by tonight ( :	 
Go to and enter to win new headphones from . Ends January 31st ! 
Feb 5th what more could you ask for .	 
Nothing about to go take a damn nap . Im sleepy .! Lets Go shopping Tomorrow whn kurt get outta class	 
Meg !  Today 's Thought God is consistent , but ur inconsistency w/ Him may be the cause of ur issues .	 
good boy , yeah Feb is up the air for us ; we are either hitting LA , or Brazil , haha , decisions decisions 	 
basketball game AND snow ? im so glad im not driving tonight .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that  
Big Bang not new tonight . Good .	 
devo'd. might not even be going out , tend to have a better time staying in drinking all night blasting music haha	 
Finally finished packing . I cant wait to leave tomorrow .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
If one drink can make tonight slip my mind , then I should drink up , so I can forget that I haven't lived my life .	 
YUP :D Found out this morning . Start on Tues , so LOTS to do before I leave here Sun 
Today 's agenda go NUS career fair , find a job , dun end up being a full-time parody Twitter account user .	 
Tomorrow bitch we will Haven't red cup in a min man lol	 
U.S. bullion prices were mixed Thursday as gold and silver returned to the negative column while platinum and pa . 
Zumba was great ! Ready for tomorrow night  )	 
what is everyone doing tonight ! american idol or jersey shores 	 
2nd Straight Sellout ? Tickets are going fast for Saturday 's game against Milwaukee . 1st 2,500 fans get a winter hat ! 
Big day tomorrow , conference wrestling tournament Tucker Creek .	 
Lol not at all . I work tomorrow morning !	 
I hanging with my girls tonite ! , and 
liked today ! but it feels kinda wrong having a series without in it :/	 
Just followed sharp shooter whose 43 point performance yesterday was nothing short of ridiculous .	 
Its official . FAB crew will be featured as this months headliner . Music by Time lapse films from Fri .	 
Good one brewing at The Hump . Vandy and Miss St going back n forth in 1st half .	 
It 's on Feb 9th at 7PM . I'm too broke to keep doing this , that 's what I keep telling myself . Then I book more meals .	 
Nissan Leaf production to hit full capacity by March 
Major internet disruptions in Egypt on the eve of Friday 's protests . That 's not what you want . 
xD as you may or may not have noticed , but pretty much everything is a competition to me 	 
WIN a FREE silver pendant for Valentine 's Day . Just follow us and this tweet to enter ! Winner will be selected F .	 
Uh-oh . race bib arrived by mail today . I guess I'm gonna have to ski this thing .	 
nicki 's ' moment 4 life ' video premiere 's at 7:54 on mtv tonight ! lol	 
today will be remembered as the day i decided not to give a fuck and just go with the flow 	 
Very excited about taking John for a surprise weekend away tomorrow !	 
thanks . Lucky bastard . Still , at least I details to take Imogen Karting on her 4th birthday this year 	 
This may sound outlandish , but when you garden this summer , if you see Organic seeds buy as many as you can afford . Hold onto them .	 
Ah I see ! The one with the bike path , right ? I'll ask my housemate first and we may come down to try . 	 
those clouds aren't friendly today . i thought , it'll be rainy today . the cold will come ~	 
Every morning , every afternoon , every night I wanna be with you-	 
thanks and I know that is why I concentrated on common sense security measures , though may have over stated them	 
One Night Stand by Divide The Day 
actually I am getting some sleep , since yesterday , finally .  lol	 
Special for my friend may God 's grace pour out like rain 
Heading back today from " tropical " Fort St John and vancouver to cold Toronto . Looking forward to seeing Elizabeth .	 
:D just made my night ! 	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
u said u were gon come dwn early today ! 
LACE UP 2010 's mixtape dude really needs 2 have a proper show in Paris ! Should do 1st part may 20th	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
today will be remembered as the day i decided not to give a fuck and just go with the flow 	 
Hmmm should I spend my 21st bday in Vegas or Atlanta ? I really want to go to Magic City Lenox Mall though lol	 
I think it 's safe to say that ' Nine in the Afternoon ' is still my theme song .	 
no junk food in the morning ,. hehe	 
My dreams of debauchery is a fancy Hollywood hotel are to coming true . Oh , may the stars align !	 
Can you create a mascot for reducing energy consumption by Feb 9 ?  
Our man in Spain was on World Football Daily tonight , have a listen - 
The East may take it again this year in the All Star game .	 
Rumor is that may have capitulated to Monsanto , trying to get them to categorically deny the rumor 100% Please ask them .	 
Homecoming game tomorrow woot . hope we dont lose	 
i think u may be right	 
lol to the 10th degree , cam killed it that 's when I liked him lol .	 
Smoking more than half a pack a day may cause infertility or irregular menstrual cycles in women . 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
Is very sleepy night all x	 
Had a great night with some crazy irish tourists . love em` !	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
Free Book Friday entries closes at 2.30 pm - get yourself in the draw to win four fantastic children 's books ! .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
ummm u betta be at venue tonight !	 
i thought you were stopping for the whole month of January !	 
Not feeling well right now . think I will head to bed a little early . Back to work tomorrow . Nighty night !	 
Now starting on 28 Feb , places still available come work with me . 	 
thats just sick How can parents do that to their children they shud let them just be kids mun . Well night anyways  xx	 
I'm so ova all this snow c'mon summer ! But anyway sorry I missed ur call I was knocked all the way out hmu later bro ! 	 
Thats how you start the season John Super job ! Love to watch you play well ! What time you t-off tomorrow ?	 
The world won't end in 2012 because Harry 's kids go to Hogwarts on September 1st , 2017 . 
Well we all shine on , like the moon and the stars and the sun . 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
I love you guys ! K bye ! Tuesday ! 
During ' confidentiality briefing ' bit of tonight it included " obviously people talk to their partners about things but we would expect .	 
I know ! They better be all over each other at the Oscars . :D Also , is it August yet ? :D	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open . 
A fabulous evening with friends at Virgin Money celebrating Burns Nigh	 
sunday is another study time	 
Remember when had only released My World ? Nobody knew who he was ? Yeah , I miss those times . December 2009 . 3	 
Our Crab Feed fundraiser is this Saturday ! Purchase tix online today ! 
You make me high like the 4th of july	 
They do taste terrible , but you WAKE up . Prepared to be awake all night . 	 
I'm exhausted . I demand pampering tonight .	 
my new family is feeding me food tonight	 
I won't let anyone ruin my mood today !	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
I don't think tomorrow 's gonna be a good game , but thats just me	 
I had this really weird dream last night that I was pregnant . twice . 
" Tell her got the bar tonight n the speakeasy " --- Fuckin Right ! Sir Richards was on SMASH	 
Scratch tennis tonight , now im gonna go commit	 
PS Fingers crossed I make on that last tweet . Updated last night . Writing ther .	 
new mv for came out today ! :D check it out possibly you'll 3 them too ! 
although the behavior may be questionable lol , I like the shirt/tie/slacks combo in your avatar !	 
Gunna end up spending so much money tomorrow :/ i hate shopping . I always buy useless crap .	 
Thanks God it 's Friday ! Enjoy your weekend .	 
going to the skate party tonight !	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you ,  
I LOVE it ! have movie-will watch ! The 2nd is even better ! U shld watch the movies . Very good ! 
y u takin night classes guy	 
Okay , our saturday night live music is back in full swing and we have a treat for you this saturday . Sarana Verlin . htt .	 
Heard my shit ? You may like it . But they got some nice artists in the area . Rt All type i want some new local shit m .	 
haha , grounded by twitter , night fella x	 
lmao fuck up like we not drinkin tomorrow thou . 	 
just realized its today !	 
Oh , happy day ! Today is National Chocolate Cake Day ! Try this great for your loved ones and let them eat cake ! h .	 
Can't wait til tomorrow night , fuck yes .	 
6 Video ! - Just posted the 6th DCUO video content ! Check out myself and quantum man owning brother blood !. 
Random conversation starter the water cooler tomorrow AM 8 million pounds of guacamole will be consumed on Super Bowl Sunday ! 
So glad I wash myself . Watched Mum give the dog a bath today it looked scarey !	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
Haha ! I used to have coffee with him every morning !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
you goin to the hookah on Saturday for Ty bday ?	 
Today 's work contents is " Shaping the Cork grip ".	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season	 
It 's gonna rain tonight .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Can't wait for Vegas tomorrow .	 
cant wait to go to the mountains soon , sit and revitalize . beautiful city covered in white and roma lights . tomorrow please come 
I think we may be getting there even earlier just to make sure we get on the barricade . They dont set the barricades up	 
I have to draft a client proposal for morning . Slept three hour this morning because of nyt response .	 
Okay am off this bitch . Good night and good morning . TTYL sweet dreams	 
good morning world ! 1.2811 9:24 a.m at Tokyo 
the sun is so hot , the drinks are so cold .	 
Kids have no school again tomorrow , I need to figure out where to take them with an internet connection .	 
" Wake up to a wet dream , everyday is Friday every night 's a sex scene " 
nice little break , real life tomorrow .	 
after today i wont be able to drink it much so im enjoying it .	 
Making dinner and getting ready for art night .	 
I thought I would never see Justin Bieber on New . Music . Live . this Tuesday ! . please make my dreams come true ? 3 
I wonder if remembers to wear purple tomorrow . I know I am ! 
whistle will be used tonight !	 
Thanks to + for tonight	 
Called surgeon today . surgery scheduled for April 11th . So.it 's time to freak the freak-out !	 
As Dexter would say ." Tonights the night " Vampire Diaries is back . Episode 212 ! Don't miss it .	 
yayayaya~ Good morning~ count down for the CNY holidays !	 
Screen Plus design , deliver and install all of its products . 
Last place I took a photo was in my apartment last night with friends .	 
I'm the girl . You're the boy . You text me first or we don't talk today . 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I'm going second hand book shopping tomorrow . I definitely always judge a book by it 's cover . Any recommendations ?	 
we def start grad rehearsal in June 3 Months if its up to me . Lol , can't count Feb . March , April , may !	 
Manoel ! I'm fine and you ? I thought of you today , the Company !	 
Anne Bishop has written us a wonderful post on a very special story in Twilight 's Dawn . But both not to be read till .	 
A very Good Morning to Exabytes fans . Friday is that we always waiting for . Forecast that this weekend will going . 
Nissan Leaf production to hit full capacity by March 
going to see tomorrow( :	 
I may have drunk a bit too much , but the BBC weatherman is bigger than the entire Earth . He 's a giant .	 
Relationships may not be for everyone , but it 's extremely not made for people who are fond of complaining .	 
I hope everyone has class/school tomorrow cause I WON'T	 
Today 's iPad launch will shake up tablet market The Apple iPad , the iconic touchscreen tablet PC , finally makes . 
Tomorrow is spa day ! Anyone know some good places ?	 
Pandas and Golden Bears looking for big wins at home this weekend vs . Pandas at 6 , Bears at 8 fri . and sat . 
Irvine Ranch Water District 50 Years of Value In May 1974 , new neighborhoods were sprouting up all over the new . 
My sister has a game at Harrison tonight . Wish I could be there .	 
great to see you in Muncie tonight . Head on over to bsusportslink.com to watch the game live !	 
It 's a fiery pasta and Italian sausage dinner night ! 
we had a yo momma joke session on here one night , it was funny !	 
of course ! Good luck  Getting ready to speak to a near sold out crowd at holland bloorview tonight !	 
- just be like we tryin to come to the studio saturday round 3 . and get travis archer number too , he say he'll get us for $5	 
Reid may have voted no so he could bring the vote back later . Maj . Leader often does so for procedural reasons	 
hellow Casper 's First Street Bakers will close retail business Asbury said if customers on Friday hav . thank you	 
Looks like the nap didn't work out . Still rested for tonight .	 
I feel this may be a dancing by myself night 	 
good morning ! have a good day^^	 
Stop morning shows from phoning it in . 
Someone tweeted they got " bristol " tickets today , and I thought Virginia , but it was Wales .	 
aww mann . but i have cass all day tomorrow except for between 1:10 and 2:30	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
two rockstars in two hours . gonna finish up psychology thursday strong !	 
Shout out to for keeping the picture and signatures we gave him in 6th grade ! 
Heat is on tonight	 
" Just as the moon reflects the light of the sun , God created us to reflect His light and love to the world ." Marian Jordan	 
Is finishing up dinner at outback then going to bed I'm still pretty tired from yesterday .	 
Organic gardening calendar for February In addition , feed with a granular organic fertilizer , such as Garden-Vi . htt .	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
Travis is being stupid about pancakes tonight , so I'm not cooking them for him .	 
no snow for me but it 's thursday , for us . Tom is 
Today , I'm " jumping thru hoops " for some of my clients-but no train wrecks like poor Charlie Sheen . I hope he gets back on track - talented !	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
dat was a good nap ! now ima b up all night	 
So do not worry about tomorrow ; it will have enough worries of its own . There is no need to add to the troubles each day 
opus 510 tomorrow !	 
Looking for help for android game programming So , tomorrow is Global Game Jam , and I'm feeling a tad unprepared . 
I'm not entirely sure I can make it through this night . 
Nine years ago today , and I went on our first date . He took me to see Amelie and he fell asleep !	 
Im going with you tomorrow . Okay 
A pretty girl can kiss a guy , a bird can kiss a butterfly . The rising sun can kiss the grass , but u my friend , yes .	 
With stacked farm system , Royals may not be lousy for long In an offseason in which they traded their best play . 
nah , thursday for me . i still got school tomorrow 	 
As you can see , there are two options for our Tea Chocolate Tasting event ! One on Friday , Feb . 11th and one on . 
I have registered to workshop this Saturday . Have you ?	 
was terrible tonight , the only decent thing was that lemons banter	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
General Debate 28 January 2011 | Kiwiblog i am eligible for legal aid . eh .?. are you .? i cd handle the public . 
Listening to Tuesday 's and the " sleeping with your pets " segment . Our cats are locked out of our room at nights 	 
i believe ima be letting loose tomorrow night and finally having some fun fingers 
Rent paid til May . Phone bill paid til May . Money to the side for utilities . what am I missing ? oh shit ! and duhh	 
! c'mon, i know you wanna go back to the OMAHA MALL .	 
I forgot to brush teeth last 2 night , cos I didn't sleep . I forgot to brush teeth last night also . My god my god my teeth .	 
So glad tomorrow is a friday !	 
I used to be on here ALL DAY oh TC lOL ! Like till 6 in the morning 
I hate when I cant sleep cuz of thinking of something stupid u can't get it out of your mind , and tomorrow I have school , well it 's happening	 
Ugh , I really thought it was earlier today .	 
i do want 2 say thanks 4 the cet chat i mean it U have a good night and god blees GOTITANS	 
hope you have an amazing day ! i tried to get it trending earlier and i will tomorrow again !  follow me back please babe ?! xo	 
. just claimed that tonight her brother was gayer than me . So I pulled down my pants and proved her wrong .	 
Novak from UM . can only stop him w/a handgun , league rules frown upon that . Maybe a body on him ? Oh wait , he was fouled on his 1st trey .	 
Duck , weave , and knock the other guy 's block off . See what 's hot and new in Fight Night Champion . .	 
Adrian Bowie looks awful tonight . 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
moment for life nicki minaj ft drake music video world premier tonight at 7:54 on mtv ! Watch it	 
ooooo I love that one ! haha ! have a great class ! see u sunday ! 	 
def ! I took the SUV out today , no car today it would have gotten stuck !	 
yah but We should stay Monday .	 
Ok mr hot nurse is coming to get me . Last test of the evening then I can finally eat .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
paper due tomorrow.haven't started yet . story of my life . 
Snowiest NJ January in 62 yrs . This is a great way to begin the year . Why is everybody hatin on the snow ? 
Chelsea have embarrassed themselves enough for one evening . Don't come back with an improved bid roman . Keep your dignity at least . 
Check out my new blog post " Notes From Last Sunday "! 
gud morning folks .	 
Join me for a free Monthly Planning Webinar and together we will design the February that you want . 
Still waiting for Neil Diamond to follow me . C'mon, Neil . You know you want to .	 
extended ! to win $ 100.00 USD final name and winner picked on Saturday !  .	 
I know on say that they will air on Wednesday but it 's just because they didn't change that yet .	 
Today is my birthday , Can you give the best present of my life ? It 's just answer me !	 
good morning Indonesia !	 
The PM is in Victoria today - what do you think about the flood levy ? 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
its time for $3 cocktails and lots of good music tonight at Cibo Restaurant with Brandon Gilbert aka DJ NB	 
i've finished writing to " back up " . i'll post the words on my blog tonight and send you the link .	 
1/27 Event Center PAINT CLUB tonight at the EC ! Come assemble paint your minis and get some professional tips tonight ! ffgec.com/calendar	 
aw babes x r u out sat nite for birthday ? 
I have 12 tracking numbers for items send since Dec 6th . Now have 5 lost  item numbers to go with them . wankers .	 
Check out my video from today 's event launching our City 's new anti-graffiti effort . www.bit.ly/montie	 
cookbook meeting with beth dooley tonight on the heels of meeting with architect equip dealer earlier . 2011 the year of fun projects !	 
Finally the office come on Friday .!	 
good game last night i think i'm starting to find my groove	 
I just booked my ticket to Syndey . I arrive 7:20 am APr 1 .	 
All of our brothers are PUMPED for tonight 9 . .	 
Please consider running a Tor relay or bridge today 
believe it or not . I feel like I could be your puff buddy today .  Just that kind of day .	 
Good morning . How did you sleep last night ?	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
Bridgey water OK to use Coliban Water has lifted its boil water notice for Bridgewater as of 10am today . 
The Boston Morning Journal of Boston , Massachusetts , reported that " an enthusiastic Union demonstration occurred ". 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Ima be tweeting like a fiend tonight . I can feel it	 
Sweet . I may even pay the upgrade yearly	 
Can't believe I'm going to miss this ! Word on the street is is in it to win it on Sat night for Spock 's 50th bday	 
No . No . Not at all . Honestly want to puke . Watched B puke twice tonight , might be related ?	 
Just looking around to local food festival today .	 
May I follow you ? I love meeting other Braves fanatics !	 
shoot iono lol my mom tries to keep me away as much as she can . soon though . end of february . i know ill be there in march	 
home now . time to clean and get ready for tonight 	 
Successful evening ! Our wedding DJ was unflappable at our strict music requirements . i.e. music elitism . 
attendees on Monday morning  Don't cry because it 's over , smile because it happened .	 
I endorse the amount of Leppard you have rocked today	 
Who wants to come hoem with me tomorrow ?	 
tomorrow for work i'm supposed to dress as if i'm going to a cozy cabin , or wear a bad sweater . i don't own ugly clothes . help ?	 
Last night a nice roast simmered in the crock pot all day . Tonight . roasting a whole chicken coated in evol , salt pepper and herbs .	 
Ur the man JD ! great day today -- so nice to get off to a great start for a change	 
i've got to wake up at 04:30 today for london . maybe if i dream of having sleep while im sleeping ill get twice as much .	 
First night of our N . American tour tonight in Vancouver ! We've just posted very special live clips to celebrate . www.int .	 
I like the Knicks over the Heat tonight	 
Playboy is holding a Casting Call in Dallas today for potential Playmates Texas girls interested in posing for the mag .	 
I sent you a letter yesterday . :D	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
No better time than now to let go of yesterday to welcome the future with an open arm embrace	 
sunday we're headed out to the 
Who tryin to party tonight ?	 
w Clearly . So one needs to go go night school	 
exhausted and not feeling it . disconnecting and locking myself away for the night .	 
Your messing around aren't you ?! Thats not fair to do to a London fan at half 12 at night !  x	 
We discussed it during a teachers class yesterday . Everything was spot on except for the " teachers as nation-builders " bit .	 
Diocesan Training Day on April 2nd 
Its thursday , so i go to school Monday ! x	 
dear bed , im sorry i left you this morning , take me back ? ) :	 
bye all time to sleep see you tomorrow	 
i love the smell of nail polish in the morning .	 
Going out on a night like tonight . that sucks !	 
Prospect chief received largest pay rise A housing association chief executive who retires in April received th . 
chingu ! U so hardworking ! Woke up so early go ba sat ! Power !	 
I hear gone be live tonight damn right !	 
Our daily Japan snow and weather Now ! reports , Friday 28th January 2011 
Soliciter at 30th Street Station just asked me to a Bible discussion in the food court . Wait . what ?	 
Thank god it 's Friday tomorrow , school just drains me , there 's to many chav 's there ' - '	 
Ladies Wear shoes that fit . your big toe should NOT be scraping the ground all night	 
It 's been a minute since I rocked the stage . Dope to get back at it with Blaze , Boondox So Sick ! Feb . 18th Windsor / Feb 20th Toronto	 
I went once with someone else . Fast food really doesn't do it for me , but tonight I had a hankering !	 
Come check out the band at the Wells Fargo Sports Center ! feb 12th 5pm Im tapin an interview With them !	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
C'mon son . they hacked my twitter .	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
This weekend we are having auditions for " Lilia " over at The Friendly Spot , 11-3 , sat sun 	 
Great tip with photos for making eyes look less night of the living dead 
I am in a terrible state today !	 
Alan and I was accused of kidnapping Asa yesterday and cops showed up ! lol it was too funny	 
I thought I would never see Justin Bieber on New . Music . Live . this Tuesday ! . please make my dreams come true ? 3*	 
' one love , one heart one night ; one day will be together ' 	 
Ok what 's all the womon of NYC wanna do tonight ,.? I'm thinking about hitting the meat packing district . Who 's in ? DM me	 
WIN tickets to the BIG GAME in Arlington on Feb . 6 , courtesy of Tx . State Farm . Go to and click The Big Game button	 
that 's on Sunday . no way I can go to that	 
Good night everyone xx	 
I have noticed his over abundance of tweeting today	 
getting wild with my girl tonight and the ladies	 
yes you may !	 
From WSMV-TV Appeals Court Rejects Convicted Killer 's Claim Convicted killer Perry March 's words have come bac . 
True . In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive kind of way .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Thank god no cricket tonight . Time to finally watch a bit of NSW magic ! Go SOK .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
really should go to sleep as getting up in the morning is like the hardest thing	 
nope , no more classes until monday ! jumping on a train at about 12 tomorrow to visit my dad .	 
staying over my rents house for the night . excited to watch 3	 
And my 2nd favorite player melo getting that starting spot on the west	 
Staying another night 	 
forgive me , i'm just trying to find . remembering sunday ~	 
whats on monday ?	 
i may have glandular fever , BUT , i may be recording for my tweet family in the next 2 weeks ! :O x	 
Today was an ok day . Untill after school 	 
I watched you walk away today . I wonder if you thought to stay	 
Going to the U of A game vs . UCLA tonight	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
last friday night yea i think we broke the law always say weer gonna stop this friday night do it all again	 
Are you a Social Entrepreneur ? The Hub Ventures is a 12 week evening program that will provide funding and . .	 
that 's what you get for those 5 text messages on Monday .	 
Sixty degrees . Definitely a homebrew and cigar night on the porch . 
All the good movies are on tonight .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
3rd floor is so empty  its DEAD !	 
Oh FUCKING HELL I forgot - Fat Tony + Donnis + The Nice Guys tonight at House of Blues - go to that because it is going to be incredibly fun	 
If the information blackout is not lifted before the Friday prayers , then you must say a prayer for Egyptians . God .	 
7 o clock night class is rough ! another hour a half of this shit	 
off to bed now . night guys !  x	 
. I like the ending of the 5th one when the guy crushed the cop	 
Id be ampd if the mall gets closed tomorrow ! Dont feel like working cause I want to go Sledding !	 
c'mon little monsters lets get to trend ! 3 we love you ! 3	 
Really nice to be picked up in today  
I hope you have a great show tonight Brian  . Love .	 
My name making alot since to me today , smh .	 
Have you hugged a musician today ? Get to know the local artists behind The Marilyn . Download free music tracks . 
I couldn't sleep . It 's not because of coffee ; it 's because of insomnia . I was up all night thinking about coffee .	 
February to April programme of events online today Our	 
if you ask me tomorrow ill say the same thing	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Here 's the thing . Vancouver is already 3rd most expensive city in the world and you want more expensive houses ? 
Last day of work tomorrow ! 
Isn't there time penciled in for the Dail on Sat Night between 8-10 . Perhaps a trip to the Aras on Sunday Morning ?	 
I totally fell asleep rocking out to earlier today . xD	 
Midterms start Monday .	 
I think imma go to bible study tomorrow I need as much jesus as I can get	 
today was stressful as hell almost didn't pass that chem exam and I bombed geometry at least I got another try 2morrow	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
will you be up all night weeing then ?	 
Limited spaces available in our felting and spinning workshops coming up in Davis on Saturday , 2/6 !. 
. and no i'm not going to primal tonight -__-	 
got tickets to a Royksopp show late March . Can't wait . 	 
Japanese stocks slip on weak earnings LOS ANGELES  -- Japanese stocks edged lower Friday morning , . 
It will be even better Friday . perfect patio weather .	 
walked only 3 or 4 miles today . Threw a US rock over the Rio Grande into Mexico . finally got somewhere with phone service decent wifi .	 
Broncos ' Champ Bailey named to NFL Pro Bowl , sets a record for cornerbacks Thursday , in what could be his last . 
Who got a sunburn shoveling today ? O , that would be me .	 
Tampa ad agency Triad strikes deal with eBay The pact announced Thursday represents a significant shift in eBay . 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Design Preis Schweiz hits LA tonight ! Come see us talking Swiss at the A+D Museum in LA 
Good guitar club today	 
Hillside - 3:00 PM Thu - Classic skiing at Hillside does not get any better than it is today - perfect tracks , Extra . 
at* :D I'm so tired for a tonight !	 
to thanks for the follow . enjoy your evening .	 
Time to take my SAT test at home . Hate taking classes for it	 
Kearney 's Bridal Guide came out today . Check out this link and our ad on Page 7 . I think you will also like . 
is it bad that i'm already feeling like its the weekend even though its only thurs !?	 
Protesting MTV 's " The Skins " by not doing my usual Friday night routine of pills , drugs , and prostitution .	 
omg Silent Library is trending ! I was just talking to my mom and brother about that show today 	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
How far are you from DC ? I may be heading that way again next month for a couple of days	 
Paid $ 2,000 today for a shot that didn't work . Awesome	 
Good morning , earth punishers ! What 's your destruction for the day ? Oh , don't forget to say " Thanks for sparing me another day ." to Him .	 
Good morning twitter ! ^_^	 
4 hours left to sleep . ill die at work tomorrow lol but hey i dont give a fuck haha	 
Thank you  Did you see my message to you this morning ? Are you having a great day ?	 
I am watching Friday Night Lights  
Got my boots on today all im missin is a snake hahaha	 
Last night my dreams are so violent	 
fucks sake ! Made my night even worse ! He needs a slap . Why do that ! I'm so glad they are strong  
Actually thinking about going to bed early . I wanna be well rested for my exam tomorrow .	 
It 's sucks that I have no car right now . It 's at home or I'll be at the lab tonight hopefully mar	 
All inabilities are limited to the confines of the mind . Make the mind listen to you . Good morning beautiful souls !	 
lol yeah cus you had " tumbling practice " did we have practice today !? No worries tomorrow you will ! 	 
Good morning friends ! 	 
Who wants to keep my car for me tomorrow morn and Sunday evening ? I don't feel like driving downtown for these Nike meetings .	 
Evening miss . What are you up to ?	 
thats what credit cards are for . Bed ? not when Picture of you is on LOL u have Baby can i hold you 1st .	 
Nothing much going on , had a good day today and I am going to relax for the rest of tonight and read my book .  Three more days till Sunday	 
Good evening Twitter .	 
I have to be up at 9 tomorrow to go register , sweeet - . -	 
So the speakers are gonna be goin hammer all night ! tonight !	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
Febuary 11th . Everyone who is reading this or knows me in person best be seeing ' s 3 
Right by the sandwich ingredients . I'll even make the tea tonight !	 
THANKS ! I have part 3 tomorrow so keep the coming :D	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
its a feel good friday on wave www.wave891.fm	 
Dwight Howard received 2nd most All-Star votes among all players , most in Eastern Conference	 
If I don't write my exam tomorrow I'll pass the course with a 74 . Hmmm I'm debating if I should keep studying .	 
I know ! Tues into Wed I am so over this shit	 
Right lovely people - and all the horrid people too - I'm off to bed now . Think of me tomorrow , in the back of a van , with idiots .	 
Don't you wanna stay here a little while ? Don't you wanna hold each other tight ? Don't you wanna fall asleep with me .	 
Wow I've heard of getting people prepared but KFOR 4 in OKC put on the scare . says Life Threatening Winter Storm coming Monday .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
just decorated the month of february for !	 
i'm actually in hoenn right now . i'll be back tomorrow morning . what 's up ?	 
wake up , drink coffee , check emails , play castle age , facebook , google voice , emails for business , put Morgan on bus . yep that 's my morning	 
As mentioned , VY has 10th day of league yr 4.25 M bonus , further has 8.5 M salary . W locker room concern .	 
 Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Fine pints of London Pride and a kebab at midnight . The perfect London evening	 
As you may have noticed , we have said goodbye to our Tweet Bird Jaco logo . it was time for him to spread his wings . Fly safe , old friend .	 
Fuck it me Nicki Nick getting married today now you bitches that be hating can catch a bouquet , oww*	 
Alright . I'm getting ready now . We'll probably be there at 930-10ish tonight .	 
Oops . Forgot to say . All you vegetable tweeters - we tried the black salsify yesterday . Beautiful sweet root vegetable taste . Very light .	 
What 's up with only giving Nashville ONE hour tonight ? Why not 2 ? We're Music City after all !	 
my birthday ? it will be on feb 8th 	 
Who 's down to kick it friday , sat , sun ?	 
i have ruined my body . what have you done today	 
Celebrity voted ' Worst Celebrity Influence ' for 2nd year running 
Celebrity voted ' Worst Celebrity Influence ' for 2nd year running 
Celebrity voted ' Worst Celebrity Influence ' for 2nd year running 
My friend said I was being Black today . Still don't get how , but I responded by saying " HELL NAW " then realized that didn't help and stopped	 
I woke up . I hope it will be all fine today .	 
Great way to spend Friday -_-  
Morning Ritual She got it . 
Alright , sounds good . Have a great night ! ^DJ	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Going to hoop with Limas so and can enjoy some of their anniversary night .	 
Where should you be at tomorrow night ? Watch until 2:02 in to hear the answer . 
or not , i just want to sit and listen to lightspeed champion all night	 
Where should you be at tomorrow night ? Watch until 2:02 in to hear the answer . 
Would say imma try 200 more tonite but I already know imma fail lol	 
what games you getting in february ?	 
it may sound corny btu Thank her mom for making her daughter . You win the mom heart . you won the da .	 
So everybody that I'm close with do not make any plans Saturday	 
Sophomores have free dress tomorrow for winning the raffle competition	 
you'd never get laid off here mate . There 's enuff till may LOL	 
I actually stalk 's twitter like no fucking tomorrow	 
Fuck calculus ! Finals tomorrow . Time to study	 
Question to ask your peeps ? 	 
gonna see you tonight at orchard central ! ( :	 
There 's a lot more straight people at punk this time , I'm quite glad as 80% of the time I'm out in London it 's tranny or gay night .	 
Come see us ALMAGEST ! live in Dortmund and Hamburg , friday the 28th and saturday the 29th ; Info 
lol wat r u doing there . didnt have to work today ? lol u could . but then you would know where i worked n stalk me lol 	 
FIRST SHOW BOOKED ! This lineup is gigantic . More deetz soon but keep march 6 open no matter what !	 
. Just feel so lazy and so sad ! This is my worst morning !	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Helping my daughter with her homework . Big tests tomorrow . She 's learning economics in the 4th grade , as well she should .	 
Hey All , can't do Post Office Club Hotel gig on Sat 29th Jan however our close friends ' The Hostiles ' will be cranking out their originals !	 
Good point . it 's also the 15th anniversary of this too 
so today I get a voicemail and someone says their my secret admirer  then my teacher gave me a note from this person hmmm !	 
, Beyond excited for the reunion tonight !	 
Hey Mr Tambourine Man , play a song for me . In the jingle jangle morning I'll come following you .	 
Good morning everyone ! I am so late ! Bad weather here , super !  Party na later ! 
- Last night I lay in bed looking up at the stars in the sky and I thought to myself , where the heck is the ceiling . haha	 
Grocery shopping tomorrow 	 
elon feb 12 . You better not 
I made a snooki joke in class tonight . She 4 feet 10 inches tall . and wide . 
Mi call you back last night all now yu nuh look pon mi .	 
There 's the black swan =] ] As a Capricorn you may think that there is no one who could possibly live up to your expectations	 
February is going to be a wonderful month for me .	 
New Jersey Shore On Tonight And Spinning In Seattle Tonight Let 's Go ! 
Just had no appreciation of how much wi fi , gps , screen brightness etc affected it . Phone died at 1pm yesterday . Lessons were learned	 
" Cause god makes no mistakes . Dont hide yourself in regret , just love yourself and you're set " feb 13 3	 
they are lucky we have to wait untill Tuesday 	 
Thank god it 's Friday tomorrow !	 
A Norwalk stable that houses horses for show competitors lost its main source of revenue today after the roof of . 
baby on Saturday , but since baby will be in NICU at least 2 weeks . she plans on returning to work on Monday . Is it me or is there . 	 
Tune in to tomorrow on We have x x . Dope show ! 
Fantastic come back by Bice after a rocky start to win it 9-5 against Walchuk Perfect 8th end stone sealed it .	 
tomorrow is friday , thanks good !	 
i can't think of anywhere else i'd rather be on a thursday night than at the indiana hospital .	 
Import Tax on Electronics Halved China yesterday halved the import tax on electronic products , including comput . 
Fuck 2nd quarter . lts nothing more l can do to help my grade so l'll just be working towards 3rd quarter .	 
Haha . What're you up to today ?	 
Today marks the anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau , the largest Nazi death camp . 
Canon 's net profit in October-December quarter down on falling prices By AP TOKYO - Japan 's Canon Inc . said Thu . 
my birthday is 3 months from today lol	 
lets party Grand Opening Fly Fridays Red Sky Jan 28th Everyone Free all Night 
nice ! Aha not a good night for you then !	 
the night is too young	 
Night everybody living in princess land ! Where everyone lives like a princess ! We love you Brooke ! night xxx	 
Yeah , we're gonna fight We do it every night Baby , when you scratch You know I'm gonna bite You can make me . 
Well , at least I'm on my way home . Today was not as insane as yesterday , but hoping to X the stress out tomorrow	 
didnt go tonight . going tomorrow probably !	 
What 14-year-old 's today look like , 
all these days off , go to school with knowledge on Monday	 
drop your plans ! I'm going to spent time with you tomorrow !	 
i think imma actually try and dress tomorrow instead of just a sweater and jeans . 	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
tonight . patron& da weed . is all i need .	 
gave my blog a bit of a face lift this afternoon . www.homesweetveganhome.blogspot.com	 
only had a night out there so didn't get to look around much	 
Jersey Fresh Blog Senior Bowl North Squad Monday . my observations from monday 's practice 
i have 10 people that said coolio to me today	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Ditto . It will only be worse tomorrow .	 
chay deele kacha . Aye i guess the sun dont come out in the winter ? Lmfao retad	 
I'm happy today had an interview and got hired it you have to be quick at it but at least its something finally something !       	 
Due to the inclement weather , all School District of Philadelphia Schools will be closed Friday , January 28th .	 
thinking i might be a bit sore tomorrow . Lynne woke up some muscles !	 
good luck tonight at Seaton Hill 
I need this tonight .	 
The for Growth meeting in March is worth checking out folks 
naw , my knee just popped out of place randomly on monday and i had surgery that night but i mean im gettin better tho	 
they may not but you did ask who was better	 
Vampire Diaries tonight ? I think yes . Jersey Shore ? I think yes ! 	 
Tonight , I'm gonna try to make it without you .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
you goin to the meets tonight ?	 
Today is the day when women was told they can't think for themselves	 
I plan on makin feel like a lightweight saturday	 
Got my  All I have to do in the morning is pay $200 and I'll have my car ! Whoop whoop !	 
Farewell and good night 
in concert tonight at Southern Wesleyan University 8:30 pm FREE . Get . Here . Now .	 
Just been text tragic news that a Celtic fan died of a heart attack at the match tonight . R . I . P	 
Leveling Kit So the old ladies bum has started to sag with her 
Wtf do I do tomorrow if I didn't even hand in my form for the winter activity day thingy ? LAWL .	 
My Jummah prayers will be dedicated to all those under opression . May Allah provide The People of with a triumphant .	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
No games on the schedule tonight as the best of the best are headed to Raleigh for the 
it 's ok . Val was there naman .  oh , have route replied already ? we want to sked our vid launch this Feb sana .	 
Join our mailing list today ! Help us stay in touch with you . 
working again tomorrow . thanks for the angels who bring me to work each day i work ! more power !	 
My night instantly gets ruined when dan the douche bag walks thru the door 
didn't mind skins tonight . it 's just not the same without effy freddie and that  series 3 will ALWAYS be the best	 
" Forget everything just for tonight ."	 
Who wanna help me write this paper that 's due tomorrow smh . i could really use the help =\	 
Sunday Girl is approximately the worst music I've ever heard . ' Stop Hey '  is horrific . A weaker voice than Goulding .	 
we dont have school tomorrow .	 
This is gna be 1 long ass night :/ my legs are aching and I can barely breath lol I t .http://yearbook.com/a/zdl8q	 
Tune in tomorrow for my thoughts on how bosses feel about workplace friendships on  at 9 .	 
Sam on gma . Sam on live w regis and kellie . Sam on world news tonight . Sam almost run by man on skis . Sam needs more java !	 
I thought I would never see Justin Bieber on New . Music . Live . this Tuesday ! . please make my dreams come true ? 3	 
Ryan did so good last night ! Can't wait to see them play again .	 
Shopping spree so I can stay in the LES tonight !   
The ultimate Beatles Tribute at Pineapple Grove on Fri Feb 4th . Join us ! 
We are excited to announce that we'll be releasing our third record , Simple Math , on May 10 , 2011 // .	 
Moonee Valley analysed and two tips for tomorrow 
Is the AllStar game Sunday amd Monday or Saturday and Sunday ?	 
I wonder if anyone thinks of me when they can't fall asleep at night . 
ima put this on repeat let it play all night .	 
studying for exam for physics tomorrow	 
Maybe . Imagine that . Haha im gonna get some sleep , long college day tomorrow night night xx	 
Had some In-N-Out today for lunch . it has been too long . forgot how good it really is . Thanks Justin .	 
good lad ! You're learning fast ! You sort it out with brade about tomorrow ?	 
motrin was the first thing I took this morning . no effect . Just left a msg for my acupuncturist .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I hear your in manc tomorrow ! Hope you have a good time x	 
leah 's decided she 's sleeping in my room tonight , she talks in her sleep , fab	 
I'm in the mood to act like a jerk tonight .	 
this show at the laugh house on Saturday . wanted u to come .	 
i told my four year old brother he didnt have " school " tomorrow . He like " i know ." wth ?	 
Anyone at tonight . and wants some free T&D shit . find us ! The game is afoot .	 
No skool for tomorrow Yay !	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
IOC to meet with governments , others on March 1 Rogge also called on sports bodies and governments around the w . 
IOC to meet with governments , others on March 1 Rogge also called on sports bodies and governments around the w . 
IOC to meet with governments , others on March 1 Rogge also called on sports bodies and governments around the w . 
hows about hello dare ?  how about your new colleague ? He seemed happy on the radio today , kinda like christmas !	 
Im already tan . dying my skin orange for tonight 's jersey shore 
C'mon over.I'll supply the shovel . take as much as you'd like !	 
Bones , directed by David is on tonight ! It 's going to be a good one !  .	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
IOC to meet with governments , others on March 1 Rogge also called on sports bodies and governments around the w . 
IOC to meet with governments , others on March 1 Rogge also called on sports bodies and governments around the w . 
I may/may not have 4 events pertaining to the show tomorrow showing up on my Facebook right now . I may be a BIT excited . =D	 
Feels like sunday .	 
wah morning people . I am too early today	 
Ur in Hunter right ? I just checked and they are open tomorrow	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
to my army of followers , im off to bed to spank the monkey , good morning vietnam xx	 
now have two stacks of great reads on my night stand ! will I ever come up for air ! or see the light of day ?	 
IOC to meet with governments , others on March 1 Rogge also called on sports bodies and governments around the w . 
My boo boo was taking care of me today !	 
I ABSOLUTELY L.O.V.E " Take me away " by Keyshia Cole . Its my 2nd fav song off her new album . If you havent got it yet imma need you to get it	 
Yea i know my job keeps closing these poor kids r goin to be in school till aug . its sad but what can we do but i need a truck	 
cuz yesterday n then try to make up today	 
My 14th birthday today . A tweet from seriously would make my day perfect ! xx	 
Naw As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
lmao my sis said fee can you watch her in the morning , me 0 . o No .	 
Just trying to make the best out of my night which means drinking a bunch more beer and wandering around .	 
Sounds good - Taco Thursday ;-) Making some yummy tacos !	 
Got coffee ? Get a cozy ! = less cardboard which is a good thing ! I am giving one away tonight . .	 
Fucking psychos/ what did you watch the Dems . in the Senate today to	 
Found a great book tonight , Anatomy of Hatha yoga , cannot wait to start it :D	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Wonder how i'm gonna spend my night . 
time to sleep . it gets easier every night that passes .	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
This better be a trending topic by the end of tonight or ima cut you ! 
Source within Vodafone they R going to shut all lines within 2 hrs until 5 p.m. on Fri . 
it 's TAKS night bullshit D :	 
Yesterday , i realized I'm gradually becoming a perv . This is not good !	 
Thanks Vincent for a civilized programme about ideas . Good night now .	 
Who going to skool tomorrow ? 
You have good sources ! according to my sources , is having $1 pitchers tonight , no cover . 
Nigga , I told you I'm in Arkansas . I ain't coming back til late Saturday , night . We on a road trip .	 
I gotta go shower and head to a friend 's house ! Someone let me know if trends during Vampire Diaries and Nikita tonight !	 
Had a good dinner with the boys . Legs are spent but excited for practice tomorrow .	 
Lol fought last weekend . will be again march 5 . aren't you fighting this weekend ? Do I have the dates wrong ? 
Pray for . Very worried as it seems that government is planning a war crime tomorrow against people . We are all ready .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
A bizarre mix of tv tonight . From traditional inuit hunting to LED covered wedding dresses .	 
its debatable ! I'd say Monday but calendar week starts Sunday , I guess its subjective !	 
I think he likes mee 333 Cuss he suree wass flirting with me in 7th hour ;D	 
We hope you enjoy this slide show and music of old Baghdad . have a nice evening . 
working hard on bookings for Craft Fair at Edwinstowe Notts . on 27th March . Still same spaces for certain Crafts details www.caregan.co.uk	 
it 's evening here , but morning !	 
got only one class today . lucky me . but have to register for lab session . 
Not sure what to cook tonight 
DC has a 2 hour delay tomorrow !	 
First gig of the tour tonight in Lisbon Portugal . Set time 2:30 - 4:00	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
returns to for Friday protests 
What to do with the kids tomorrow during the school in-service ? McMenamins Grand Lodge to host Washington Co . Family Day ! 
All I ask all day today are questions pertaining to weird clothes .	 
Tampa ad agency Triad strikes deal with eBay The pact announced Thursday represents a significant shift in eBay . 
Wats the move Tonight !	 
Never was a gin drinker . Love it today and lots of it . Except for the tonic exploding in the kitchen .	 
yeah . useless evening .	 
Know Justice Conference 2011 Register by February 11th to make sure you get a free lunch and an event t-shirt !. 
Great Banter tonight at Twisted Pepper , heartening turn out of food-focussed folk . Watch this space for more future food chats !	 
Haha gross I remember that night ! I can't believe she 's in this class . is crazy !	 
i aint go . too expensive . lol . plus that play is tonight.we'll get them next game lol	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . .	 
you may have problems	 
Q when do you leave ?  A march 2 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
great last night full house Parra Stadium i was so proud to be involved in what was a great night ! take note i have OF .	 
Signed the lease on our new location ! To be announced at the opening of our " Only Locals " art show Fri , Feb 4th :/ .	 
nice workout today . feel great ! tomorrow is officially friday	 
you gonna find out wassup tomorrow if we got school ! lls	 
you were in my dream last night u were in jersey boys on the westend and i dreamt tht i met you lol it was really weird ! =) x	 
Looks like I'm going to London on March 20th ! 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Hello everyone . Made my calls today .	 
When evening had come , they brought to Him many who were demon-possessed	 
Might try ' em some evening . Will let you know if I do !	 
Any bets tonight ?	 
wish i could've just gone to the skins party here in tonight . fucking play/internship/life . once in a lifetime GONE .	 
I agree . Just would be weird if he plays fri/sat . misses sun/mon but then plays for pitt on tues .	 
Would you like to come along to a 90 minute design and life style seminar on the Sunshine Coast Tue 1st of Feb for . 
Now carrying 7 diff kinds of American Spirit , plenty of COLD BEER ready to go ! No class tomorrow HERE WE GO !	 
Awful day ; Perfect night 	 
Choose your words carefully . They may come back to destroy you .	 
interesting cboe index put to call ratio closed at 2.02 , cboe $vix index closed above 1 , for 2nd day in a row , usually means a down day	 
Wishing people would stop annoying me this week . Tomorrow will be a better day . Claiming it now .	 
Up the wooden hill to blanket fair ! Night all x	 
oh wow . woman you are slow.I've been capped for like the past wk and a half . It 's supposed to reset today	 
Really really wish i was goin out tonight .	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
OMG this hurts too much today !. it never hurts this much not since high school . owwwwwwww	 
Judge sets May trial date for battle over the estate of SA beer distributor , deceased millionaire Leo Block . 
oh I may have some ice cream and watch beyond scared straight	 
Good Morning y'all! Have a good one . 3	 
Right bed Night !	 
seen you today looking all good 	 
- Meet gorgeous at r events .	 
Id go back to december all the time .	 
today was a pretty decent day . Not bad at all .	 
" Jesus is with you in the process -- He is not giving up on you ."  // Great night .	 
i'm inviting you to my house for dinner next wed . night . and none of this i have to work crap	 
Happy go Friday :D	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
LOL ! Check the lyrics on that !  November Rain - drawing 
Jini shot Merrilee Rush " Angel of the Morning " . be our angel and fund the through !	 
Omg late comers rock on \m/ so many ppl today is awesome ! Beats everyday so little ppl de ! ) :	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
wow i dont even know what to think about you anymore . you are just on me all day today	 
we design in timber , fabrics , glass , aluminium , chrome stainless steel . 
Professor of Medicine Mark Genovese address the different types of arthritis that are prevalent in today 's society . 
I almost ran over a pigeon today . I thought of you .	 
I I've 5 test tomorrow and I'm only ready for 2	 
MMM in Denver for CIA snow Convention tomorrow he will spinning at the Skull Candy booth for 15 min . Check him out !	 
I have CCBB but I am not in Waco  Will be in the area tomorrow tho .	 
i got the Knicks coming away with the W tonight	 
And will do so repeatedly during the night -- for no apparent reason . So odd . Wouldn't care except it wakes everyone in my building .	 
thanks . lets drink beers in benicia tonight	 
Me too . I wasn't as free like today but I get to do more stuff that I want ; ___ ;	 
Floored by the response to last 5 mins of last night . If u missed , MUST SEE .	 
Today was a good day 	 
Hey missy ! Mayra wanted me to tell you she 's having a birthday dinner tomorrow at the Highlands and wants us to go 	 
morning guys have a raining day .	 
Does anyone know if Grey 's is new tonight ?	 
Ever played ball ? You know this kid this video -- My Coach Sucks Got this from the skipper today . LMAO	 
ayee if u save me some ill let u ride with me tomorrow	 
Love hurts today i saw you walking on the streets , your eyes were filled with loneliness . Tears in eyes . Come on to me i will love .	 
am i reading this right or ? tyler brown with the C for the whalers tonight ?	 
Know U want a dog but this is better Just what U and John would love . Knocked em dead today hun XXX	 
So much FAIL ! I just got a question via Xbox Xperts saying I got banned for hosting 10th lobbies . Why was I banned ? 
667 rolls of sushi were eaten 667 photos were taken on my camera last night . 
Several large glasses of red wine a late night round at the neighbours . not looking forward to getting up at 7am .	 
1st grade family math night = fun !	 
looking forward to having lunch and spending time today with a Great friend !	 
Oh that is wonderful . Is it all over now ? Are the roads cleared or are they expecting more tonight ?	 
saw a girl today wid a louis bag but den everything else bout her was shit like shit like mk one atlantic clothing w LOOOOOOL	 
Cornerback Champ Bailey to Make Record 10th Pro Bowl Appearance 
el agua del mar es dulce ?	 
Good morning and I love you both 
Check out Nepali by TDM Design on the Today Show ! 
so in june 2010 i didn't know I was gone end up at savannah state working at wal mart	 
no worries . Just curious . I'll get online when I get home . Holler if you're free . Otherwise another night  gl w writing	 
everyone in the new Travel Hacking Cartel , sorry for screwing up the name personalization in today 's email . should be fixed next time 	 
monday monday can trust that day monday monday sometimes it just turns out that way	 
Nice backpedaling in today 's piece , but did you forget Peyton Manning when you said football isn't for players who think ?	 
Looking forward to your trade mags presentation in Feb . Would like to learn more about this .	 
No hershey today 	 
Ok first day of new placement tomorrow so should probably go beds . Night Night .	 
OK . on very short notice . playing at 5 PM SLT live today . stay tuned .	 
For sure watching the reunion tonight	 
Only in Austin . I saw a guy today on his bike with nothing on but a thong . Serious . 
Thanks God I'm single . Good morning and have a great Friday .	 
Am always sweet n gud 2 u ma . Remember d 1st day we tweeted ? Lmao ! B sweet to me ma 
yes only night only . Haha	 
Beardown Cats ! Statement game . America tonight is the night you finally can see how good D Will really is 
I see ya'll having a show in brussels on saturday . might pass by 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Due to minor setbacks I did not make it to Kings liquors yesterday , but today its on ! Who with me ?	 
We're fighting for conservatives . join 's team today ! 
Tennessee Titans Just announced tonite ,, at 6pm central ,,, Jeff Fisher ,, head coach is leaving 
I love how i was scared about my math exam today and i called my mom LOL i'm such a mama 's girl 3	 
chat tonight . Can't wait !	 
Turning Down the Heat May Turn Up Weight Loss Now researchers say that there seems to be a connection between s . 
if u like that one read his new one . The business of the 21st century .	 
We are horrified and saddened by the murder of prominent activist in yesterday afternoon .	 
CW has postponed new Supernatural episode from tomorrow til 4th Feb . 
I work on Saturday	 
The past should be left in the past . Live life for what tomorrow has to offer , not for what yesterday has taken away . .	 
Genuinely happy today . Not sure why . but I like it !	 
So my sons ' stepmother called today to tell me their grades in school . I'm quite pleased !	 
If anyone is having issues logging in to the new website , it may be because you are using your previous login . 
" Before 1948 Doctors had to decide whether a patient could afford to pay or go without care " Send them a message 26 .	 
how chunky do my thighs look tonight ! Jeez crack coconuts come to mind ! I need some Gok special knickers !	 
Good afternoon cutie ! Happy Birthday to you from your New Zealand fans ! We love you here ! 333	 
No Celts were named AS starters , that could hurt your Portland play tonight as they will be steaming	 
It 's a matter of time . When the sun rises , the world will be a better place . 
Going to hoop with Limas so and can enjoy some of their anniversary night .	 
Turning Down the Heat May Turn Up Weight Loss 
Dinner bout to be on point tonite . You know why ? Because I'm making it ! music from Lil B*	 
Sucks for the people that have school tomorrow .	 
!. ++_ wet tshirt contest . this friday at club drama see the pics -- www.G1PARTY.COM	 
who fuckin with the snowball fight tomorrow	 
True measure of a man is how he treats someone who can do him absolutely no good . Do something great for a stranger today .	 
We're planning our 9th Social Media Breakfast East Bay in 2 weeks . You working on launching the LA chapter soon ?	 
by gorgeous tweeters you mean me haha  just kidding ! Night mate  x	 
Eating at 5 guys for the 1st time with ( :	 
Show still on tomorrow ? 
Qualified 12th  today . It 's a long race though we have a very consistent package capable of winning again . 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
hmmm . have u ever wondered why the sun lightens our hair but darkens our skin ?	 
good morning here in Venezuela are the 8pm yet . Dx the last story came to america ? When ? T_T	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
so excited to watch and video Moment 4 Life tonight on MTV at 7:54 , everyone tune in !	 
Saw wild wolves for the first time today .	 
may have been at that moment . Can't call it . I'm saying bein there shit seemed loud . Tho sometimes crowd cues were off	 
Is the Knicks/Heat game on TV tonight ? Somebody gimme a good reason to watch the Knicks lose ?	 
Even at night , there is moonlight . Even in darkness , there is hope . Jesus is hope , made manifest . Jesus is faith when I have none .	 
We at Tonight -- 
Fallout New Vegas TOP 10 ENEMIES  Top favorites in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 20 look at 
Why am i still so wide awake ? Must be all that testosterone and manliness from watching people beat each other up all night .	 
dude it sounded so freaking good last night	 
I'll meet you tonight on top of the world 3	 
Maryland takes its first lead of the night . Terps up 12-11 over UVA	 
I have a massive paper due March 3rd . The Kings ' month-long road trip could not have come at a better time .	 
I can't believe how much snow I moved today . Who needs the gym	 
may you what ?! 	 
View latest equipment see a presentation in Arlington , Va . on Feb 1 - 2 
U are I bought a 12 pack of Keystone bottle today . I might be the coolest person currently in Stevens Point .	 
happy morning to all , kinda busy this past few days , hope everything will be ok after a month , gonna take a bath and prepare for work .	 
opera ? tomorrow ? If not why not ?	 
I'm sorry baby , you're the sun and moon to me 	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
I love to fight with stupid people , especially during this time of night when im are bored	 
Paddy says to Mick , " Christmas is on Friday this year ". Mick said , " Let 's hope it 's not the 13th then ".	 
to see you I would've been in line yesterday	 
The strange LACK of stage butterflies proved to cause random memory loss awkward pauses S Hope my birthday brings an improved 2nd round !	 
Imagery Update - Week of January 24th The Google Earth and Maps Imagery team has just released another aerial a . 
Imagery Update - Week of January 24th The Google Earth and Maps Imagery team has just released another aerial a . 
that 's every night with u !	 
My Player gets Finals MVP , 6th MOY , is STILL not starting next season for ? I request a trade --- 
Turning Down the Heat May Turn Up Weight Loss Now researchers say that there seems to be a connection between s . 
HATES night classes =(	 
I hope the roads will be better tomorrow for our trip back to y-town !	 
Being attacked by allergies today and my allergy pills aren't doing a thing to help .	 
REMINDER Dying is easy , getting insurance is hard . 	 
well it may be u for real or mook got somebody pregnant ! Rotflmao	 
Got a robocall from the school stating that due to snow , student parking lot closed tomorrow . never saw such disappointment on kids faces	 
I haven't had a Valentine since I was in 9th grade . Just sad lol	 
check out for Check out yesterday 's winner . I wanted tha . 
Update Former S . African leader Nelson Mandela , recovering from collapsed lung , could be released from hospital Frida .	 
Ready to own our hockey game tonight . Even got my " get psyched " mix out . Thanks 
So how was everyone 's day/night ? 
we can dismiss faulty images . In the sequence of images taken , some may be blurred by micro-movement of the camera 
Thank you to all who bought raffle tickets today . even if you don't win , you still win . There are a lot of . .	 
Second day off . Will we get tomorrow off too ?! this storm was nuts !	 
may sometimes withdraw into themselves if their desire for superiority is contested .	 
I hope my sisters have fun and be tonight ! I love you ladies !  
Reading made my night .	 
So excited to go see the Blazers play the Celtics tonight ; sosad that won't be playing/hasn't asked fans to meet up in .	 
I wanna hangout tonight with my PIC :D 3	 
i am 15 lol turning 16 in may	 
" Saturday Night Live " will PROBABLY boost our sales . BUT dont rely on that do your job as and Cop another co .	 
valentine 's day falls on a monday . i'm going to be walking into school like this - . -	 
so I missed talking to you so thanks for making time for little ol me today ! Love our talks !	 
lol this saturday round 7pm . come threw . games and fun .	 
mmm i wonder if can bust 5000 tweets by tonite	 
We are excited to announce that we'll be releasing our third record , Simple Math , on May 10 , 2011 // .	 
so this week is yet again , spirit week . today was create your own style day .  comments ?  
Marie biscuits dipped in hot milk tea . Thats how i rock my friday morning . 	 
Is today Friday ?	 
Yesterday 's quite got me worked up . Today 's got to be happy thoughts .	 
yea I think the 14th	 
i expect an album in april	 
- check your FB . I posted a secret note about the this Sunday at 1:00 PM ! It concerns that guy ;-)	 
i now have a morning class . 
i don't plan on watching it . I'm on MSN tonight	 
Good to chat again . Night .	 
I'm down there next week , Thursday evening is possible for hangouts .	 
Last night was pretty damned amazing . Good times with good peeps .	 
bracing myself for the Reunion of tonight . I don't know how much more of this I can take 
if anybody wants to do something . text me . cant be bored again like i was last night	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Ok so I wake up this morning to a massive session thanks to and . I did find  
Today was funny to me	 
I missed The Game the other night . can someone send me a link to watch it ?	 
I have class tomorrow . Def time to fix my " nache " 	 
Ah you're so lucky ! I unfortunately have school still May . 	 
last night 's still stuck in my mind . dangit . :/	 
Kawasaki Launch Night draw - FIRST PLACE - A trip for two to JAPAN and a tour of the Kawasaki factory won by a custom .	 
Just went boot shopping . Couldn't find anything I liked under $250 . So becky is shopping tomorrow morning .	 
It may go without saying , but there 's some serious blowing in World Saxophone Quartet 's ' Yes We Can .' 
I was so happy today . Finally stopped . and started again once I was treated like shit and Cynthia . please be okay .	 
For pain on the Eve may change to relief and be washed away by the light of New Day . You still in trouble ? E-mail me . !	 
Forgot u had a drive today 
Walk-ins Visit Studio 318 Salon on Friday , 01/28/2011 , and receive an extra 5% off of any service . Print this tweet to receive ! 438-2318	 
Better Place 's Shai Agassi Electric cars may outsell gas vehicles by 2020 Industry pioneer predicts gas autos . 
I will get thai food tonight . it will happen . and my dog is throwing up so brb .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
you say that every morning XD	 
Went back to sleep , and I just got out of bed . Cant believe I slept for 9 hours yesterday and 12 hours last night . Haha	 
More colleges n da morning	 
Bashed out 900 words . Had a conference call with Sydney and ate a crunchie . That 's not a bad evening all in all	 
I'm too hype for this Moment 4 Life video . IDC , though . I know I'll dream happy and in color tonight .	 
How much snow expected tomorrow ?	 
Nope . straight to jammies . Took a shower this morning . 	 
Dang@NickCannon thats a hell of a meal on a thursday nite . lol . i envy u . lol	 
you ain't coming tonight bro ?	 
My Thursday Thrill -- Punks Jump Up - Blockhead  via 
 i didnt even cook for myself today lol	 
I hope everyone can join us Sunday as we explore the model of discipleship Jesus left for us . Discipleship is for . 
That is the reason ! TVD airs the same time as American Idol , so they're repeating TVD tomorrow to widen its viewership .	 
Get ready for Big Gay Week ! February to April programme of events online today 
no exercise for me today	 
not necessarily , just cuz u been together for 4 yrs + dont mean u're ready for marriage , yall still may not even be it 4 each otha	 
40 miles from the sun .	 
omg WAIT ? Why am I still on ? I have school tomorrow :/ smh .	 
fuck yes ! just checked and school is closed again tomorrow ! :D	 
With the massive demonstration for tomorrow it is scary the prediction of much violence . Please Stay Extra , Extra Safe !	 
Nobody is texting back today . National hate on dani day	 
whoa your foursquare just sent me a photo of your check in from yesterday !	 
nicki 's ' moment 4 life ' video premiere 's at 7:54 on mtv tonight ! lol	 
Thoughts are with our peoples in it 's getting ugly over there and tomorrow is looking brutal .	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
my ticket is open now I can't get out of the night shift !	 
" Saturday Night Live " will PROBABLY boost our sales . BUT dont rely on that do your job as and Cop another co .	 
I bought a book called " The Astrology Of Great Gay Sex " today . so amazing .	 
yeah . have something I wanna wrap up , but I may be in bed by 8:30 at this rate	 
will you be back in time for movie night ?	 
The texts and tweets I got today saying good luck are overwhelming . You guys mean soo much to me .	 
hmm what am i going to wear out tonight .	 
my prof emailed that class is indeed canceled tonight totally validating my decision to not shower today .	 
the thing about her is tht she'll always have my back just like i had hers today lmao my jamaican bud	 
Going to learn how to tape and mud tonight !  
hope u feel better honey.*here 's a few kisses* take two and tweet me in the morning .	 
I am not sure if I am going to watch tonight 's game now that I have a storyline . Doubt NY Sports Digest wants me to rip Knicks .	 
u were amazing last night hun , get back on telly soon x	 
LMAO we need to ask Donnie  mother may I . lol	 
Lol ok . So I'll be there at that time but do I meet u at the gate of pe or the locker where I saw you today in the morning ?	 
Your question is why I wonder if Arrietty will play in US theaters at all . Disney may just release the Blu-Ray instead . We'll see .	 
look here auntie meme ima get me some tomorrow . Where is ur salad ? Hmmmmm ? lmao .	 
Got called a whore and fuck off by a 3 year old throwing a tantrum today . Unbelievable . Parents called immediately .	 
So I see has put every day of his life in 8th grade into AMAZING SPIDER-MAN 
while driving , i saw rainbow . what a pleasant morning . have a blast everyone ! 
Bought a hat today that helps stop hunger and disease in the third world . It 's just a drop in the bucket but that 's more then many have .	 
WORST IN SHOW betting that this doc will be the sleeper hit of the SF Independent Film Festival running Feb 3-17 
it was the one that i was singing today . haha	 
Join these guys in one hour on XBL for some Co-Op Red Dead Redemption Co-Op Night - .	 
iit starts tomorrow ?	 
This month in real estate January 2011 - check it out .	 
Apollo talent show tonite on campus !	 
I met the cutest boy ive seen in a while today	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
On my way to meet a cool faithful group of students for lectures today . Video , presentation , tutorial . ' Interesting ' is spelled F . U . N .	 
Good morning . need ur coffee fix here 's a song from Ashton an Scout 
Yay for Friday ! Looking forward to Friday lunch with the Brisbane peeps !	 
If someone wants to invite me for a dinner today  , I will be happy as I'll have nothing to eat at home and no wish for shopping .	 
haha yes yes it was . Good times right thur right thur ! loll	 
I had a nice Saturday evening planned in the house with my wine Jack Jack with his apple juice til came along bamboozled me !	 
Awe , no problem 3 Im gonna cry if tomorrow your not here . C And you wouldnt want that ., haha	 
Great new listing coming tomorrow in Carytown ! Walk to Secco , Carytown Sushi or the New York Deli ( just to name a . 
pocket dialed 911 yesterday . 3	 
Sorted out my old paperwork today . Huge gaps in the book-cases . Munro of paper and boxes in spare bedroom . Husband is hiding .	 
got to go for a shower then bed night x	 
I Live For . Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 28 look at 
I woke up this morning with a killer headache and a sore throat . Think I'm coming down with something , esp . due to lack of sleep . :/	 
I feel like I need to drink tonight	 
they called my mom yesterday	 
im not really feeling loved today	 
Going to Chicago tonight . So excited .	 
ahh damn but are u off tomorrow ?	 
I don't know if I'll be able to make it in today . The hamster is loose in the house somewhere and if I don't find it and put it back in i .	 
Today is officially the worst day of my fucking life .	 
BOOYAH ! " its official . i bought red dye . im doing it tonight  "	 
b . bride trunk show Yesterday was the soft opening of B . Bride in Costa Mesa , CA and we did a mini trunk show w . 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off , insider  
GaGa Goes Bowling !Lady GaGa apparently was spotted at the Bowlmor Lanes in Times Square on Tuesday night , hang . 
Hasan Ali may face several cases 
The School District has cancelled classes for tomorrow , but SLA will open at 10am to attendees . More details to follow .	 
bedtime night love you xx	 
After eating this food I might go home and pass out with no return till tomorrow morning	 
you should be doing it late at night when you are bored LOL	 
In that case I fully endorse this project , whatever it may be .	 
I wanted music to get psyched for the gym tonight , listening to Jackson Browne 's " Stay ." I think I'm doing this wrong .	 
this will surely be a star-studded event This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
You know that it is $1 Cuervo and $1 Absolute tonight at Libations-get here early-the place to be Libations .	 
My Tax refund been in my account since the 25th and I didn't even know	 
Boredom happy Friday is tomorrow .	 
Two Area Bowlers Reach Individual Finals In State Bowling Two area bowlers earned berths in Friday 's individual . 
That , right there just made my night .  I might even get that Tattooed its that good .	 
Tunnel complete , venturing out tomorrow !  I'm good thanks ! Yes , still have snow , but has	 
JANUARY SALE ! Only a few days to go ! Grab those bargains now ! 
I hear you . I've asked for a home can crusher for my 29th birthday next week . 
Paradoxically though it may seem , it is none the less true that life imitates art far more than art imitates life	 
i want to go out tonight	 
the topic { for today is them hoes is jealous of zeek } they want my boi friend . lmao i love it	 
Its caused by stress . i dont have that anymore . Lol alcohol . Nope . Caffeine ! Oh my God ah di coffee wah me keep on ah mek ah night time lol	 
Ken Feinberg Final , interim oil spill claims payments to begin Feb . 18 
Wish I had some now , this is night 3 with no sleep .	 
Join + other local activists for Thirsty Thursdays tonight 6pm at Manny 's  low key w/ pool , darts , food	 
Great win tonight ladies	 
listening to music at night . 	 
Today is your day ! Your mountain is waiting . So - get on your way . ~ Dr Seuss	 
tell me why they tryna hit us wit the outside run tomorrow !	 
it 's a new direction I'm really excited about , to released in March	 
Happy Birthday to the B E S T nephew ever ! Preston my love 3 I hope he had a great day today and has fun at sushi tonight 
My Xbox and aren't playing nice tonight , and I can't find a solution .	 
well . don't think we can do any more tonight at the blinds , the sky lightening rapidly* we need darkness .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Out again for work . Meeting done tomorrow .  
True Grit may have been my favorite movie of last year . I also really liked 127 hours , but I bet the kings speech will win	 
Thx for jamming last night . You're an inspiration an awesome muso . I feel so privileged to create music with u the other emos	 
G'morning. Have a great weekend !	 
Hasan Ali may face several cases Hasan Ali Khan , the absconding Pune-based businessman , could be charged under various national secu .	 
Spent some time looking into the campaign today . It is generating buzz , good and bad . found out some answers .	 
So it just got confirmed . Everbody in miami come to my 21st b-day party at club lux on feb 4th its gonna be a movie .	 
i should make the most of the extra 8 hours a day i have thru not sleeping and do something useful . maybe i'll read lotr all night .	 
Great start John ! Take that momentum and go beat up the North course tomorrow !	 
Sell Other People 's Products Is The Easiest Way To Make Mon 
but my Q is . why are these ppl still promoting ? stop with the texts . they said ppl should stay in today meanwhile they tryna get ppl out	 
Very much enjoyed seeing you on CNN last night .	 
Who in NY/NJ had classes today and who didn't?	 
My free EP is coming soon the is due Mar . 9 | Listen to Hard Livin and download 
Day 5 . Actually took this one last night . couldn't find anything to take a pic of lol  but that 's my cat Patch ! 
Today Beat box Switch up your Saturday a	 
Tomorrow is the last day for finals . Finally !	 
African American heritage month 2011 poster competition ends Monday , January 31 
Join us this Saturday ! 
Welcome Rose , you have a good night	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:18 12 PM	 
I got one of and ricco at they 8th grade graduation	 
Playing in house chef tonight . Being paid in love . Family Study to follow .	 
good bao bei !  ) what happened to your ankle ? Poor thing . See you tonight ?	 
Math Olympiad . It was no fair ; the teacher told the 3rd grades d=rt .	 
had a chance to slap me yesterday like she said she would but she didn't smh scary ass lol	 
Bottle on deck my weekend starts tonight	 
I want a valentine ! Anybody tryna be my boo 4 1 night ?!?!	 
no,I'm not into it anymore . at least for today . maybe later in the morning CloserToTheEdge	 
Good night monsters Bye 	 
When the dawn breaks the sun will transform us .	 
haha , not even bad tv is making me sleep tonight haha . 6am wake up call too , urgh ! x	 
Awesome job on the radio . Heard your story and song on my drive to UAB this morning . Inspirational ! 
I can make you a celebrity over night .	 
Guilty as charged . See you tonight !	 
Excited for TNA tonight . Hope it doesn't suck . 
Defense will beat the Heat tonight .	 
Oh yeah I forgot the video for " Moment 4 Life " is premiering tonight	 
i love today 	 
was looking everywhere this morning for my fav pair of heels . Came home to find one of them in my trash can . my nephew is sneaky .	 
Make lots of money today promoting this Great Marketing Tool 
Rocsi looks acceptable today .	 
Here 's Linda and her snowman ! They had new snow today 
Breaking , entering and theft = my Sunday evening in Chino Hills	 
The night young . Still gon have fun lol	 
Pick 1 nite 4 a theme dinner , like Taco Tues . Not just a fun family ritual , but a break from ' what 's 4 dinner ?' It 's Spaghetti Thurs 4 us !	 
 May the Lord God give you more strength and your family in facing these challenges . Just  
Arizona Wildcats host UCLA tonight in second place showdown - - 
Brian Greene is on Colbert tonight !	 
Sorry I never connected today . ended up getting caught up at work .	 
Thursday B Dubs def needs to become a regular thing .	 
shag Friday hehe  . Gotta go school and eat some grass	 
slept last night . wasn't able to reply . lol . sorry .	 
Looking for a unique and delicious snack for Superbowl Sunday ? Try Laura 's Best Recipes Kale Chips . I will be ! 
I am so excited for Wild West Day tomorrow !	 
New Blog Update dodger stadium opening day pin april 27th 2007 
no worries , imma plunk back up after March 19th	 
Shot in our dream home today . Mid-centrury EVERYTHING . I swoon . Big thanks to my fab friend for helping make magic !	 
indeed , thought it might be unsociable clogging up timelines during the day and also am out tomorrow so might not get a chance !	 
Today has been pretty freakin awesome ! :D	 
For tomorrow night 's mood . Enjoy .	 
yep it started today ! i would'nt bother though , just tried to watch it lost interest after 10 mins 
haha ! we saw you in the cafe today	 
The Game Purp Patron is the mixtape of the year right now . Best since J . Cole Friday Night Lights	 
i feel upset tonight 	 
Hobbling around pathetically today . Got a cramp in my calf while sleeping last night . Screamed then went back to sleep .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
i can't wait till tonight 's episode of jersey shore .	 
if you can get a ride later , that 's cool , i can wait till this arvo , but not until tomorrow lol	 
Zumba tomorrow . Getting my body sorted out for the summer . Jokes aside , my shape is changing after 3 weeks . Core strength ! Loves it .	 
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
 aww , i'm sure you looked adorable . i wore my jeans cuffed today as well , but with flats .	 
Agency meeting tomorrow  --- Whoop whoop ! Get em sis !	 
I'm gonna go to knit night ! Saturday treatment actually rocks !	 
What is up with the weather , yesterday was blazing hot and I wake up to a cool windy morning . 
Recording keys and vox with tonight . So far so good . 
March Promotion Kids are Free in , book your Family Vacation before Jan . 31 
naw not today I'm starving out here lol	 
when are we having a horror movie night party ? i'll even cook dinner . he he x	 
Tell me why this morning i goes to walk my dog with just my E.K. shorts on slippers my E.K. shirt i was trippin	 
Good morning to you to . I hope all is well .	 
sure , call me tomorrow !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
You may have spotted on Pleasure or Pain on BBC 1 the other night , if not , here it is ! 
Was able to squeeze in a nap today . So happy .	 
Has decided to get a lot done tonight . Why not ?	 
yo . U comin to the shore club tonight ?	 
Morning . my Xavier perform at school . 
God woke you up this morning to see another day ! That 's more than enough to be " Thankful " for .  .	 
Friday madness . Friday payday .	 
Need to replace " dented " steering wheel emblem .So after a bad night ( or honestly shitty ref , no calls for ap . 
The Parsons Tomato is back After a years absence the best tasting year round tomato is back at the Wed and Sat market BLT 's in the winter !	 
its tomorrow over here ! Happy birthday !	 
can't wait for Sunday !	 
Yesterday all my troubles seem so far away .	 
Extreme cave diving tonight on National Geographic channel 
I'm getting stuff together for this interview tomorrow . Money is my focal point !	 
hand on the wheel ! Driving to work at 7AM in balmy weather and listening to .  Good morning , and !	 
Join us FREE EVERY MONDAY for " Master Marketing Mondays " training at 9pm ET . Check out all the details 
Yesterday is a Memory , Today is a Gift , Tomarrow is a Hope .	 
R Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
Ill be leaving ireland this time tomorrow  ima miss my family and friends so much but its for the best	 
so . today is the last , or just the beginning ?	 
Tomorrow is the premiere of the new chapter of vampire diaries	 
I havent seen my mom in two weeks and then i see her today and all she does is yell at me and complain i just got home wat the fuk did i di ?	 
Lord , You have always lightened this darkness of mine ; and though the night is here , today I believe .	 
Wanna Win A Selk Bag ? Simple , post why you want one and the most creative post wins , you got till 4th Feb ! Hop . 
Ill send free carrot cake to the 10th And to my 100th follower	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Protest against the June 2009 coup d'etat in Iran - - 
i want sun . i want to tan .	 
Yay ! Go ! Meet Chicago 's 50 Top Singles . TCW 's annual February Singles issue hits stands today .	 
100 more tweets ND I reach 1000 .! That 's crazy seein that I just made a twitter Jan 16 lmaobvs	 
North Queensland prepares as Anthony tipped to reform into cyclone | Herald Sun 
Thursday = school day and I feel like crap think I'm getting that cold everyone has yucko	 
Cannot wait for friday night .	 
hope for a two hr delay tomorrow , i need one .	 
I will . I just have zippo patience today !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Good Morning folks . have a nice day . 
Good evening with my friend Barry . We saw Hours* , or Jabbar the Movie* as I like to think of it .	 
What 14-year-old 's today look like 
today haha , moneys just not in my account yet .	 
LOL Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Thank you for including me today . What an honor . 0 )	 
Little birdy told me that PM Julia Gillard will be in Swan Hill today and then heading out the Speewa . I'm. .	 
Genie awards hit the NAC March 10 , nominees announced Tuesday 
It 's always better in the morning	 
I seriously have to talk to Joanna tonight . if not her , it 's always Yadi	 
Thoughts and prayers with the police officer shot tonight in St . Albans .	 
I think I saw a pit bill when I was walking past yesterday . 
ok who was all those cute girls you was around today	 
dying my skin orange for tonight 's jersey shore 
Egypt 's protesters gear up for big Friday rallies - Yahoo ! Finance 
Tonight il be your wonder women !	 
Star Trek Girl - Music Video Top favorites in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 36 look at 
oh we are 7 hour difference . and why are you up so late . dont you have school tomorrow sweety ?	 
Maybe I'm wrong , I'm feeling right where I belong with you tonight , like being in love , to feel for the first time	 
My new song act is really coming along now . Please don't miss the debut of this new addition to my act on February 25th at The Comedy Spot !	 
Tonight 's creative energy needs a little boost via a tangerine colored dream . 
Ohh i wanna go . ill wear my sexy scrubs  DOCTOR/MEDICAL Night in Atlanta , GA tomorrow ! 
We been like peanut butter and jelly since the 7th grade ! I love yo dumb self !	 
I will be legal tomorrow !	 
I'm the girl . You're the boy . You text me first or we don't talk today . 
He was outed in a Uganda newspaper weeks ago . Yesterday he was murdered 
Save the date Computers Freedom Privacy 2011 at Georgetown Law Center JUNE 14-16 . [ fixed typo ]	 
Join Jill and the 1233 Mornings team on a health and fitness journey during Feb , details here 
mommy says it'll be on saturday . hold ya horses lol	 
yes ma'am 2nd to last home game ='(. senior night Tuesday . Sniffles . it 's all almost over 
no problem , but it 's in work . I'll upload tomorrow .	 
Today 's tip Kids that play at least 15 minutes each day significantly reduce their odds of becoming obese .	 
loves Thursdays . No gym , too much junk food , Shore , no class tomorrow . ! Break from !	 
. I was thinking about doing the same thing . ( Thankyou baby girl . What exams you take today ? . how'd you doo ?	 
Hmmm I might go exercise tonight .	 
Hope you sleep tonight . You need it .	 
movers came today !	 
Bass fishing today Pawpaw and I went bass fishing today . We really had a good day . Will not divulge much info . 
Join us for the Challenger 25th Anniversary Ceremony at the Space Mirror Memorial at KSC Visitor Complex on Jan . 28 .	 
So much FAIL ! I just got a question via Xbox Xperts saying I got banned for hosting 10th lobbies . Why was I banned ? .	 
Egypt in our prayers again tonight , God Willing , tomorrow will start a new page in the history books . 
Cool day today in Atlanta , GA shooting a hydroponics growing system , all done inside shipping containers ! Stay . .	 
If the circumstances are right , you can count on the US Government shutting down the Internet as Egypt did today .	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
i love thursdays Jersey Shore and Greys are on ! plus tmrw is friday !	 
yes there is no way Space channel will air that on Sunday , they'll announce that on Saturday night 
Home now . Work tomorrow ?	 
I saw a " Hot Mess " shirt today that was small enough for a child . Where was it 30 yrs ago .	 
otherwise it gives a concert Friday , March 11 , 21:00	 
Bernie 's office has compiled a photo gallery from today 's Social Security meeting . 
Friday 1/28 DCPS will open two hours late . Essential school personnel report on time . Admin offices open on time . .	 
leaving for LA the 11th ; am I going to catch you ? I Hope So !	 
I will send you my draft on monday if you fancy a laugh .	 
Yolo is featured on Groupon today ! Don't miss your chance on the deal , time is limited . 
Atlanta Pro Soccer Challenge to Feature MLS Teams ATLANTA  - Atlanta will have t . 
Some kids had a fight today saying tht got arrested	 
Awesome band is performing a private show tomorrow for . We have a pair of tix to giveaway . DM us for a .	 
American music supply Will u guys have Dave smith tempest When it comes out in June	 
Amazing talent and Lead character designer of G.I Joe renegade , passed away today , RIP Clement Sauve 
" As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship ." ~so true	 
Montgomery county schools off tomorrow ?. wtf	 
no ay show today ?	 
Planning for tomorrow assist in a better nights rest !	 
Making some vegan chili to warm us up during this cold night in the north east !	 
This night turning shitty	 
Today is one of those days that would improve exponentially if it were simply baseball season .	 
tell me about it in the past 4 days alone ive worked 40 hours . and i dont have a day off til monday	 
Zack Novak having a career night against my Spartans . The team is a complete grease fire .	 
Come to the " Education and Us " event next Wednesday at 6pm where we will unveil a community art piece ! For those . 
we get days off when there are hurricanes . till november if there are hurricanes , then we get weeks off .	 
Come out for Karaoke night ! We have pizza rolls , Just Dance , lots of music , fellowship a bunch of homemade cookies ! 7-9pm !	 
We learn something Tuesday and the test is Friday . She dont even go over it on Thursday .	 
LADIES If you ever said " Whew my whole outfit for tonight only cost $ 12.59 total " Thats how you know you a 
This parking lot is very dark tonight . Here 's positive thoughts that all the will be quiet all night and morning . Lol	 
In Atlanta ? Hosting or promoting an event that may be interested in alcohol sponsorship ? Let 's talk .	 
UGH ! I really don't feel like reading about the Myceneans ! 	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
Lucky I am having starbucks tomorrow  I am laying in bed lol how r y ? 	 
i'm going there to do my nails trim my eyebrows at 4.30 pm . can acc you when you go down in the evening . timing just nice =)	 
tonight should be very interesting . Not going to the usual tonight sadly .	 
No skool for tomorrow Yay !	 
yep tomorrow night after grammy 's	 
Well , tonight we've seen the world 's largest crack pipe , a dream-inducing record deck and natalie portman having a ' encounter ' with meg .	 
Today is not so fucked up after all .	 
sorry ive been rude all evening . Are you ok ?	 
I can't stop listening to July , I'm borderline addicted to this song	 
Make a change starting today ^~^	 
I was in 2nd gr . watching 25 yrs ago tom , an Am . teacher died on journey into space . Christa McAuliffe , we remember U 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking ." and got Part 5-charm Bracelet ?! Try it 
They lost they fucking mind , lol . What wrong with chicks today fuckin crazy lol	 
Who out of the people I know is thinking about going to the party at Quantum tomorrow ?	 
Check V.I.A. first thing tomorrow for 's interview with one of the ! Here 's his first 21 weeklies 
Another late night burning the midnight oil , tired , but pleased with the work done so far . standard set , now to raise the bar !	 
The power of unity group will meet here tonight - 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Who 's ready for Jersey Shore tonight ? I am :D	 
Gratitude makes sense of our past , brings peace for today and creates a vision for tomorrow . - Melodie Beattie	 
Forgive me , I'm trying to find my callingI'm calling at night 	 
has quickly developed into an addiction . I seriously watch and play it every evening lol 
Kylie Pentelow  from Thursday 
Vino again tonight . I deserve it	 
Thx bug  --- The ' My Pink Friday ' app is actually amaze . Another reason to love 
Fuck todays Thursday !? Where did the week go ? 
DG is raging tonight at a " gangland " themed mixer . Jealous ?	 
Nope . was knackered yesterday / doing 4 massages a day takes it out of me 	 
oooh sounds fun ! Any plans for tonight	 
It 's the MAWS meeting place tonite Welcome 3 Blind Wine Tasting group , Exodus group , RMH Indy- Taste of Tuscany the thirsty Moody boys !	 
tomorrow I'm going to connect on Twitter at 3:00 pm , I will check the twitter tonight and tomorrow morning and I will send	 
in Sat Feb 5th with 
Who is excited about Ricky Gervais on tonight 's all-new episode of ? Don't miss it at 9/8c !	 
can you tell him wants to freestyle battle him tonight on ustream I guess just tell Soulja if you can to tweet him	 
going home tomorrow to my lil girls ! 
Everyone 's so early today !	 
Sorry I answered from here LOL . Are you excited about tonight 's TVD ?!	 
Sometimes u have to see them as ur crayon , they may not be ur favorite color , but u need them to complete the picture	 
Something about afternoon showers . Makes you feel good !	 
Economic forecasting difficult , rugby a factor , Bollard Wellington , Jan 28 NZPA - The Rugby World Cup will add a . 
need to play some soccer tonight 
Lot of hot guys tonight  
trying out Five Guy 's Burgers in Temecula for the first time today . 
was that like the craziest thing you ever read from me lol i am good at work til forever tonight	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
wish you could come  I need some LMA ! see you in a bit ! And I know but hey- feb 9th=bento !	 
You know what January can go roll around in some mud , get buried in quick sand , and just plain GET FUCKED :o )	 
Today has been extremely disappointing . Noone noticed my haircut . I was tired throughout the whole day . The skit failed . Yeah . Everything .	 
Join us for the Challenger 25th Anniversary Ceremony at the Space Mirror Memorial at KSC Visitor Complex on Jan . 28 .	 
I had the best dream last night . and I were best friends . It was unbelievably awesome .	 
Edler /3 I may cry . Fuck . I am going to cry .	 
you may enjoy looking at my user profile considering that I have amazing ideas 	 
we used all the snow days before graduation so bring on the snow days ( we better have off tomorrow .	 
The other day got police , today got guys dressed in commando gear ! What next ?  
what happened ? Today , do you go to kmitl ?	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Lol fought last weekend . will be again march 5 . aren't you fighting this weekend ? Do I have the dates w .	 
Dinner with our staff Japanese steakhouse . Our grill master may be off his rocker just a bit but he providing lots of laughs	 
Aint talk to my ace boon coon today .	 
why does this president not want a 2nd term ? 
Good morning ! Taking a cab today because of my damn foot . On the other hand , it 's a Friday !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
O , you know me like that to know . Today=Not Your Birthday	 
July needs to hurry up faster ! aww , yes , she is the most gorgeous woman alive ! 33	 
Happy 19th Birthday to my brother !  
studio session last night In North Hollywood -Yung CB  
chillin bro bout to go to dinner wit one of my then hit a photoshoot tonight	 
Pope says atheists pick choose their morals . Correct . Today I will be frowning on child abuse not having a prob .	 
hey mama are u going to pangea tonight	 
My Mom Step-dad are leaving on Sat . for their retirement home in Victoria , TX . They'll be there until May . Gonna miss my Mommy :' (	 
Cat in da hood Most recent in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 44 look at 
I hope there 's no school tomorrow !	 
And on that note Woo hoo ! 2 hours late tomorrow , teachers !	 
XD same here . But I did want to go to a concert in April , so maybe I'll just go for it	 
going to FMU tomorrow !	 
bitchin ! is puting their new candles version on iTunes february 8th along with an old acoustic demo , and a brand new song !	 
I want to meet him . I was having fantasies about consuming cosmos at 7:30 a.m this morning after falling into the snow .	 
Going to Meltdown Comics tonight for the one year anniversary . Both creators will be there . That means six-year .	 
Cheers ! My intern fell on his head today in the half pipe and has every intention of getting drunk regardless of injury .	 
thanks god its friday 
coffee in the morning . :D	 
Rehearsing with a good friend tonight . Bliss !	 
Ordering out tonight . Yay !	 
that i met today at my marketing class . i literally shat my pants laughing 	 
 tomorrow ! hopefully when is ya mom having it ?	 
Today 's weather is lovely .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Sorry that I missed the chat today , was w/clients the whole time-just got home to dinner-filet , baked potato , blue cheese 
repeating important to us news from today Momsy 's easy access apt approved , moving date april 1st YAy !	 
Mix and Match at Photobox  3 for 2 mix and match on all prod . 
whatever it is , im off to work . home early today .	 
Need more reason to go to the post office tomorrow . Help a girl out  Free goodies ! Free shipping !	 
Monday , statistically , is the most common day for suicide . School starts on Monday Coincidence ? I THINK NOT .	 
Starting the lasagna for the tattoo party tomorrow !	 
wow the news is boring as hell , whats on tv tonight ?	 
Know how I know I'm really sick ? Haven't had a cigarette since Monday night .	 
Drivers braving today 's massive snowstorm were taken aback when they came across a giant lobster in the middle of . 
next Sunday ! Still have time . Eh or you pass the thing to me first since you don't want ?	 
Duh I thought today was Friday .	 
good evening neighbor !	 
. 700 car accidents in last night . 650 in 
Bridgey water OK to use Coliban Water has lifted its boil water notice for Bridgewater as of 10am today . 
PLC Friday oh hell yeah !	 
Game 3 today . Trying my best to stay positive cause you really can't give up . That 's not what winners do ! Go ! 
And never let sales people on commission push you into something you may regret . Been there .	 
I've no idea how to even play a song backwards but I love you all . Saw you in Sheffield in December was amazing . Xxx	 
can we do a 11 or 12pm tomorrow ?	 
Tell me what you know about dreams . tell me what you know about night terrors , nothin'.	 
I found the 5th reason why is a bitch .	 
Hope we gave school tomorrow !	 
I think the last guy on AI last night was a stand up guy . Others say he used his fiance to further himself . That be the AI producers .	 
Confirmed Ru C.L will be joining Dizz 1 to warm up the stage for Mos Def this Sunday 30th January at Billboards . 
Really need to get to sleep . At a meeting in Barnsley at 8:00 tomorrow morning .	 
Game down at the jersey shore-ish , and missin the jersey shore tonight 
I'm a check it out tonite	 
probably in the library studying for the that I'm taking on saturday 
So since it 's no school what am I Doin tomorrow ?	 
Plus One today ?	 
rem to eat medicine . Ok can we meet in feb . When ?	 
And if I show you my dark side Will you still hold me tonight ? And if I open my heart to you And show you my weak side What would you do ?	 
you too It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
Seeing them in March . they're amazing !	 
Her Majesty The Wolves - Glaciers  Top favorites in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 46 look at 
Kate Nash 27 de feb en el Gran Rex !	 
2nd birthday gets the sweet turnout of snow lovers	 
Gonna be a busy night tonight .	 
The School District has cancelled classes for tomorrow , but SLA will open at 10am to attendees . More details to follow .	 
lady gaga released more details and stuff today then she did on new years :D love you you made my day 3	 
Looking for some serious focus and energy tonight from the to 
So I just logged onto my bank account online and I have 30 dollars more today then I had yesterday .? WTF .	 
dude they rock . They are somewhat new but they are awesome ! Also love you guys in the morning !	 
Former Channel 5 sports anchor found not guilty of rape , kidnapping The woman told police in January 2010 that she . 
aww shit just got my authentic jersey ! This what imma be rockin this superbowl Sunday even tho we ain't in it !	 
Did a elliptical workout 0.68 miles in 15 mins and felt good . Snuck in an afternoon workout ! Feel much better ! 
They are going to re-air on Wednesday 2nd not .	 
Bummed I missed 's seminar today . Going to catch it on demand . [ He 's one of my favs ! ]	 
Date night and isn't wearing a hoodie ! Miracles never cease !  
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season ----- =)	 
where do you live ? we may have to come through one day !	 
curious about this as i'm thinking of using it w 4th graders . how do you incorporate ? stand alone lesson or part of something ?	 
Another project done  and relax tonight . 	 
then the 2nd in NYC and the the 8th in LA . !	 
Waiting game between COs and cougar Cat last spotted Jan . 26 on 121st Avenue near 264 Street 
Today is one of those days where I just want to cry . 
We can't wait to see you at the studio tonight for some hot yoga and calorie burning spin !	 
Did you see Little Bit featured on King 5 's New Day Northwest this morning ? If you missed it you can watch the . 
FRESH LISTING ! Come along and check it out this weekend ! Open This Saturday 10:15 - 10:45 am Re-designed Classic . 
thanks for the ! Mine are coming tomorrow xxx	 
Looks like another night of dusting registers is in store for me . 
my mantra for today " it 's never too late to be who you might have been ."	 
I had a dream this morning . I was driving on a motorcycle  on a dirt road in an industrial part of tow . 
Our increasingly hit by ! - 
Lots o ' smart funny chicks at this event tonight 
Mobarak sur les traces de Ben Ali Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 48 look at 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
lol wtf i thought today was friday	 
well . looks like it 's off to bed with me then for some well-earned rest g'night world !	 
i mean ow may subject do u personally offer	 
" Cant wait til monday !" What 's happening in Atlanta !	 
is today the only day you are going to be at the PGA show , or are you there Friday or Saturday as well ?	 
Switch off myself . I hope tomorrow will be a good day leave from our lives for at least seven days . What else can i ask ? oooh !	 
so do we have school tomorrow some body tell me plz	 
ad acra ap lin ke sna ? good morning tembagapura , it 's so nice to be here ! :D	 
The One Year Anniversary Party is tonight ! 
Tv updates done . Tomorrow is and I never submit to it . Perhaps I will this time .	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
Totally half assed my workout today . kinda sad . But all in all . its been a really good day 	 
This is where I'll be tonight , so in case you were planning on murdering me . This is the place to do it . 
I'm fucking pissed my check is gonna be shit smh these fuckers dont have school tomorrow that means no work for me -_-	 
no seriously come on over tomorrow . saturday . miss you 3	 
Well that 's a start . as for me . erm . I discovered that static from tumble dried wool is an untapped energy source today .	 
Hmm . the shit really is about to hit the fan in Egypt by all accounts this evening .	 
peaceful night at home . bout to take a shower get ready for the weekend	 
Ughh I must wash my hair tonight !	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
im sleepy but when i go to bed im in for DA night 	 
The first person to guess the ethnicity of the Santa on the shirt I'm wearing tomorrow wins a prize !	 
I know its thursday , but I still want PARTY !	 
Im going to c lady gaga february 24 , 2011 
i was productive today 
If you say you want something , but put off the work until tomorrow , then you don't want it bad enough . 
Moms home tonight . I'm actually out having a life . LOL .	 
Volvo Car launches China headquarters in Shanghai Volvo Car Corporation announced Tuesday the establishment of . 
Youth Helping Others Recently featured in Save-Youtube today update 18:26 50 look at 
" It was a bright cold day in April , and the clocks were striking thirteen ." Orwell , 1984 
I just got my hair cut . First time since August . Wow this feels weird !	 
Neurosurgeon appointment today . Fuse my skull and spine or live with grinding , headaches and pain . Hmmmmm . 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
we got another 12 inches of snow last night . joy	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
Today would be so perfect if there 's no school .	 
5 mpg decrease every two weeks . Tuesday was my last 5 mg pill .	 
Listen up guys , if you don't watch The Vampire Diaries tonight , you're gonna regret it !	 
ugh march 21st can't come soon enough	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
was helping us out in the shop today ! Thanks 
Anything that I worked off today at the gym , I have probably gained back tonight	 
I'm at results personal training  
When the night , has come . and the land is dark .	 
During today 's White House press briefing , Robert Gibbs said the White House believes the Egyptian government is stable .	 
Dr . Gee is attending the AOA President 's Council meeting on Friday Saturday . Feel free to contact him at drgee@ geeeyecare.com .	 
gotta say some strong prayers tonight cuz i know the devil is trying to get the best of me !	 
postin a few pics from last night .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Archives Outside January 2011 Link Roundup post 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
Grits and Gravy night ? Lol that sounds awesome . We're headed to a friends now for dinner . Will hit you up after .	 
Still no power ?! Sheesh , hope it comes back on soon . im hoping they close campus tomorrow im over school already .	 
sleepover at mimi 's tonight , let me pack .	 
Fuck it me and getting married today . and all you bitches that be hating can catch a bouquet	 
my friend pants'd me today .	 
is still going over how amazing concert was the other night at M.E.N ! :D :D any spare tickets for the sheffield show ?!	 
Aww me in 5th grade  
Dude , I am so excited for tomorrow ! Ahh , is almost here !	 
Last night in current room . and I can hear shagging in the one next door . |	 
I bet that we're going to have a two hour delay tomorrow .	 
Let 's see how thug really is when she goes on broadway tomorrow . Lmao	 
rolled a blunt of hash for the show in Athens tomorrow let 's get Gucci Mane wasted cc 
Going to try and avoid getting drunk on Tuesday .	 
Rocsi actually looks decent today . I miss free	 
are you still coming on saturday ?	 
morning y'all.it 's already raining in d'morning.so cold .	 
January 27 , 2011 - Hey everyone who may read , watch , follow , etc on my Tumblr ! I plan on using this to post . 
im in London quite a bit in Feb 	 
Not entirely looking forward to ferry trip tonight . I don't often get seasick but it still won't be fun , with the promised gales .	 
Today I am reading day 2 of 21 Day Fast 
Jersey shore tonight . All the way	 
kick butt out there tomorrow for all us struggling golfers'.	 
we are planning the selling of my virginity currently and this murder we plan on committing . this is a productive night .	 
yeah , night .	 
Man accused of fondling himself at Lauderdale park arrested again at another park Sun Sentinel 
cool . We're meeting photographers tomorrow ! Hope it works out .	 
Watching Arnold Schwarzenegger take on Satan . I love late night tv .	 
FACT The regime in shut down the Internet in an attempt to silence the voices of the 1 million people protesting .	 
today , I feel great . tomorrow , I will regret today . son .	 
Egypt shuts down Internet on eve of Friday protest 
Ohh snap ! Let 's have a recap night !	 
Just own the night ! 
Shoes are polished . I'm ready for tomorrow :D	 
Having trouble watching vids on dramafever tonight . Can i survive 24 hrs w/o watching Gloria ? 
Did the 2nd podcast go up yet ?	 
at fan fair from 4 to 8 tomorrow .	 
Didn't see a lot of flowers last night .	 
Amanda Holden proudly shows off her baby bump for the 1st time Next Generation Portable	 
Pooped so sleep time Night all Sweet dreams x	 
well managed no drink since last Friday , so far ! x	 
As Dexter would say ." Tonights the night " Vampire Diaries is back . Episode 212 ! Don't miss it .	 
Got a nice practice todAy can't wait for it	 
quote of the night ' oh shit , there 's blood on my marigolds '	 
NO hotel room in Americus Ga should be $94 ! They feelin themselves cause they gotta Ruby Tuesday now SMH	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Monday night and Saturday night are booked .	 
anything going on tonight other then the clubs ? lol	 
World 's Longest Lunch 2011 | March 4 in and across .	 
Today on The Talk had to be one of the best .	 
Kinda looking forward to lifting more tonight .	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
Gantz suit ! so cool Can't wait till tomorrow	 
i had White Hot Chocolate today and it reminded me of the video of you and Alex leaving Zambia  It DOES taste like cake batter !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 
Got to get at my FB messages sometime tonight .	 
hello , in the Super Kpop Sydney 2011 that aired on Sun , Jan 23rd , u guys said that Shinee debuted in 2005 , i think it 's wrong .	 
Today made me miss the summer and my summer'10 crew . \3	 
in Sun NYT " We've been working on transforming this Dept -- making it more accountable " 
30 mins away from our 1st dodgeball game !	 
5Th grade drama 33	 
I am ! They are all such a hot mess and I love it . Did you see it 's in 2 parts ? Hope there 's plenty of fighting tonight .	 
I ain't even take my nap today  . it was 
Enjoyed it man . Check you Sunday .	 
Keep me riding shotgun , always sat me up Nice . Lola Monroe | Lemonade |	 
LMAO you really do come alive at the night time	 
later today , even .	 
imposing communication blackout ahead of Friday protests . Coverage is needed ! 
good idea ! Cheeseburgers for dinner tonight ! 
iit was a shoot out on my street today and i didnt even know .!	 
Saturday feb 19 6pm . Picking up the Invites today  save the date	 
The details that you reveal about yourself today could become a ball and chain that you will have to drag through life with you .	 
three internship applications went out today - and i've already gotten a phone interview request . one email my week has turned around .	 
Meditating on this today Note to self always have a good software archeologist on staff .	 
Don't get ur hopes up . NY is back the knicks is set for another lose tonight , lets go 
I'm going to a building made entirely out of trampolines today . Which means at least one 7-year-old out there has a .	 
Tomorrow will be J-LO 's or Bey 's B-day ? I don't know . Tomorrow 's mom will decides who she want be !	 
" We made plans to kiss the sun at night . Shedding skin you show your beauty scars . Don't forget me or who you are " Plans ~ 
yup hes taking me to the kennels on saturday , to see if we can get a puppy 	 
our whole grade sat in one room , and I remember watching the tv being wheeled in . It was a big deal to watch something in class .	 
  morning Good morning ~	 
Thanks for the response ! We may contact you with some questions 
Arlington Public Schools will be closed on Friday . 	 
blueberries . shower . sleep . today is swell .	 
My inbox was flooded with comments today . 
so everybody at Prime tonight .	 
Death will give us back to God just like the setting sun is returned to the lonesome ocean .	 
2nd set of is .	 
Have a great time ! Going to for Tony 's 21st dinner . Love the specials .	 
LOL oh and I found out something really shocking today , yeah now I've stopped laughing _ 
The opposition leader returns to the country . Gears Up for Major Friday Protest 
USC we're here to make it up to you for yesterday . Dinner will be serve 6-9pm . See ya there	 
Good night peeps .	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
- Justin was born on March 1st , 1994 . if you have that date memorized . 	 
could you PLEASE follow tomorrow ? It 's really important .	 
i love getting ' morning beautiful ' texts from my bf in the morning ( :	 
lol not in my mom 's house . i dont live there anymore i'm just staying here for tonight	 
In brightest day , in blackest night , no bugs shall escape my sight ! Corps 	 
first thursday of the semester . what whatttttttttt	 
what are you doing tonight ?	 
Final day in Adelaide , heading to Sydney tonight for national track champs if I ever get a flight	 
During yesterday 's back to back subcommittee hearings on education finance Brandon Sisk from Sac State stepped up . 
Thx ! Hope to see u again soon ! Really liked my RW meal last August - hope yours is good ! 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
job interview this arvo and another next Friday , that makes interviews with 2/2 jobs I've applied for so far . on a good streak here .	 
sure . u no c . they shd ship the goods thur . plenti ooh . that is the perfect address for such transactions .D	 
I see , cool . I see your excited for TVD tonight ? I was going to type VD but that did not look right lol	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
Know U want a dog but this is better Just what U and John would love . Knocked em .	 
brandis just said that yesterday . lol .	 
that sounds like a lot more fun than thinking about studying for a test I have tomorrow .	 
the only bad thing about the weekend is that i have to wait until tuesday to see the professor whom i adore . .?	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Know U want a dog but this is better Just what U and John would love . Knocked e .	 
i CANT WAIT 2 sat nite 2 watch mrs browns boys lol	 
Tomorrow is cheat day for me ! 
Pray tomorrow goes as planned ! I " m dying to go home for a week !	 
Going to hoop with Limas so and can enjoy some of their anniversary night .	 
Attend screening of Delicious Peace Feb 7 6pm ! Come for inspiration , energy a great cup of coffee . 
I just unlocked the " School Night " badge on ! 
A man okii now you good today or do u need 2 be beat again . lol . j/k	 
Glad I'm not racing tomorrow . I'm jacked up right now	 
Detroit News Start time of Wings ' Feb . 13 game changed to 12:30 
so can we hang out tomorrow ?	 
CW has postponed new Supernatural episode from tomorrow til 4th Feb . 
Got a Drill Competition in Tallahassee Saturday I hope it goes well . :/ I'm doing a .http://yearbook.com/a/zdldf	 
Loved 10 o'clock live last night . Much better than last week .	 
I'm gone miss my cutty buddy but we all have to grow up . Enjoyed it while it lasted Rip . Jan 27 2011	 
Bowling night at Pinz in Studio City !	 
you know what im not even gone show my ass tonight tho .	 
Night  thank fook it 's Friday tomorrow ! xx	 
yeah , but i'm not religious . it 's just friday night dinner where it 's supposed to be special  [ for me ]	 
Today hardly seems worth it . Definitely should've been a snow day !	 
My high school Garfield Heights High School the team in Cleveland plays St Ed tonight another top 5 team in the area let 's Go !	 
you coming home tomorrow ?	 
imma do ALL my homework tonight , this is gonna be a fun weekend 	 
yo and tomorrow nite at ! toast our .	 
I met our new Australian Exchange student today !	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Yes I had lots of fun last night !	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Right off to bed fingers crossed for my tomorrow 	 
I am so proud of myself . I'm having such a productive afternoon !	 
Parents Today 's update . 
everyday got a test well i have test everyday til thurs	 
EUR/USD Rises on Falling House Prices Slower Manufacturing EUR/USD rose today despite the concern about the p . 
Today 's Declaration I always find or create a way .	 
hey rissa cn u tell me what period exam we have tomorrow ?	 
Thanks for joining us again ! We're happy you're enjoying your night ! Great night w 	 
THAT , my friend , is the line of the night . LOL ! By the way , what about goatees ?	 
This week 's Monday Madness Update features shemale shemale supermodel ,. more at 
Little bit of late night sf-geek humour for you , there .	 
February Sweep Spoilers for The Bold and the beautiful from CBS Soaps in depth 
you played crazy out of your mind last night I'm in awe every time I see you play	 
RTs are easy for necessary news like That Taco Bell meat may not being meat . 
4 da haters@Lakers Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight seaso	 
I am disturbed . 
lol my night is going to be interesting . Meghan is mad -_-	 
good luck tonight my nig ! go in !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
there 's never anything to do . let 's go do dinner tomorrow night ! me , you , wallace , whoever .	 
Today 's lunch looks delicious . 
It kind of sounds like " And I just want to be one tonight " but I could be making this up .	 
New phone monday 	 
Wait , is there no new episode tomorrow ? Why ?	 
So the NBA banned the goggles Wade planned on wearing tonight ? 
Strawberries wine . and punch tonight	 
My limit is 2,000 tonight	 
I'm stumped at whether to see The Rite or The Mechanic tomorrow .	 
If my flight is cancelled tomorrow I won't be surprised . British Airways is always a treat .	 
The have no All Star starters but it doesn't matter . You can watch our starters play the 2nd week in June . 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up .	 
where the fuck did january GO ?! 0-o	 
Mine was yesterday !	 
My dad just asked me what I do today	 
We listen to songs ' til five in the morning and fall asleep to it just because it reminds us of you .	 
workouts were pretty hard today . so im absolutely exhausted . it 's time to relax ! ( :	 
got stuck playing housewife tonight .	 
may be they will get you 2 UK faster , lol	 
Freshman swingman Joe Harris , who averages 10.3 points for UVa , has yet to take a shot tonight . JW	 
Amazing experience speaking with some Leadership Jacksonville folks tonight . I'm so inspired by the people in this city ! 
lol that tweet just made me remember something . did u have any salt today ?	 
I need more TV's. Too much on tonight .	 
Hey Jamie bb , got the book today . Thank you so much !	 
Chain reaction tonight !	 
I just took " Justin Bieber may save you or you may die - ." and got He loves you . 3  ! Try it 
There is a very high chance that I won't be able to open my right eye tomorrow . And I don't like it when I have no lip ring in !	 
We on for tomorrow ? 
Sleep ! G'Night to all you stopper uppers xxx	 
I'm so excited to see the 1st cut of the video next week . I asked for more pics to send to you guys . Hopefully .	 
Today 's work day is going to be a blast !	 
bowling for free hackers tonight 11pm ?	 
I get out at 9:45 tomorrow	 
Traveling 17 hrs straight on a bus was great btw . 1st class ftw ! Dinner , breakfast , movies , seats that go all the way back = 10 hrs of sleep	 
Excited as hell about tomorrow night . ^^ . It 's really happening . our Golden Tickets will work this time ! ^_^	 
I'm jealous of chipotle but it 's okay I had it yesterday 	 
you good today ?	 
well bedtime for me , sleep well or enjoy your evening depending on your longitude	 
when are you coming back to la though ? Been waiting since December ' 09 .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
not looking forward to work tonight	 
I remember Challenger like it was yesterday . Where have the last 25 years gone ? 
Burned my finger today .	 
! So much good stuff on TV tonight . what will you guys be watching ?	 
Welcome back my Mr lonely morning  kinda miss youuu	 
where are you gonna be tomorrow ?	 
" Taste of Sparkling Elusion " is featured on Cayman Islands Travel and Tourism Site ! On board the Cayman Elusion 29 Jan .	 
Tomorrow is w/ guest resident mixing  .	 
My 1st solo album " People Hear What They See " will be available on later this year . Are you as excited as I am ?	 
dammit tomorrow is friday	 
thats how I feel . But the league the fans would be pissed if he ain't play tonight	 
I have the worse study habits ever I just wake up early every morning and do it	 
the kitchen is rockin it tonight !	 
has scheduled a briefing for tomorrow to give an update on implementing repeal 
Just woke up from like nap number six today , this means imma be up all night again	 
My Celtics play tonight tomorrow 
Organic gardening calendar for February 
right we need an Oscar night then that night save the date  there were trains blocking the platform and I needed the loo	 
my tweets are not sugar coated , they may seem racial , sexist , ignorant and more . So if you are sensitive ple .	 
i think its going to be next sunday because thats when the gonzaga and dematha game was rescheduled for	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Porter , founder of the , will be on today at 5 - sharing his perfect playlist of music to go along with the ride !	 
with me at 10:25 tomorrow - live from Senior Bowl in Mobile . 
Shall i say that you didn't mention that ?! shall i ?! vanessa imma go to bed and have a nice night day w . e .	 
Dow Jones needs some caffeine tomorrow to go over 12K	 
You know what 's weird ? Lady Gaga posted lyrics to her new single tonight . yet nobody on Twitter seems to be making a big deal out of it .	 
its a feel good friday on wave www.wave891.fm	 
I won't judge you . I use it , too . Oh and I bought La Di Da this morning . You'll be getting a song soon .	 
God morning peoples let it be a lovely morning .	 
Did Ab Jam for the first time time tonight ! I . heart . turbo . jam .	 
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
' s feature on our Sunday Suppers here in North Alabama . why not start one with your friends ? .	 
you should get on cam tonight imma get on later .	 
done the soaps tonight , and what rude thought ? I've kept my socks on , although they'll be coming off soon x	 
www.blogtalkradio.com/deadballfoulshow listen live at 630pm tonight . we talk " man shit "	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:18 46 PM	 
Got your spuds for tomorrow 's Don Cameron Potato Night ? will match potato donations !	 
Organic gardening calendar for February 
If you could call my job and tell them I can't come in tonight , that'd be pretty cool .	 
Maybe just tomorrow lol	 
Argh , too much coffee today . Can't sleep and the neighbours not helping	 
Thanks ! My pleasure ! Thanks for your help today !	 
Tonight or tomorrow ? We can make it there tonight , is about to come over here now .	 
No school tomorrow bet :D	 
Winky our Sous Chef left tonight after a 2 yr stint in kitchen , not too sad though as he is going to join Gidleigh team so will see him soon	 
Don't you love those days where all you do is smile , and nothing can change your mood . Well I had one of those today . I .	 
Homegirl told me I look like Bow Wow homeboy from lottery ticket . lmao . 3rd time I done heard that	 
I dont even know . My girl stayin wit me tonight tho	 
Paul Vitter propose repealing part of 14th Amendment . Next they will reverse freeing of slaves . .	 
YES . I don't even know how . But yay , no school ! Hopefully our idiotic mayor will keep the schools shut down tomorrow too .	 
the shit you see only on tumblr . I saw a guy suck himself up a couple of night ago -| I was scarred	 
I have the pleasure of a visit from tomorrow . The theme of the visit will be " keepin ' it real " - hope messy house PBJ 's OK .	 
bout to head to Momma 's house . S/O to for holding me down today ! 
I hate midterms ! Last one tomorrow .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Ohkay , but its a friday so im trynna do something	 
Thanks  I will ! And I registered for your seminar , so I look forward to meeting you unless our paths cross before June !	 
Don't get too comfortable with who you are at any given time - you may miss the opportunity to become who you want to be . -Jon Bon Jovi	 
Tellement , but here we have TV tonight is all fail	 
Today is not a good day . At all	 
Cynthia your a great friend please come back tomorrow . please don't be hurt . you may need a heart transplant.I'll give you what 's left	 
I signed up for faster speed early Dec . and still not faster .	 
I read his tweet this morning :D stoked on that . but kid cudi fans . let 's see how this goes .	 
any time after tomorrow	 
C'mon, who thrown a chair at a fellow soldier while cursing out a superior 
. this might be the 1st tyme ii ever rocked out on v-day 4 a girl , dame college is one hell of a drug haha	 
haha I'm sure he is ! Ok mac see you tomorrow ! xx	 
my tweets are not sugar coated , they may seem racial , sexist , ignorant and more . So if you are sensitive ple .	 
The only thing I've achieved today is orgasm .	 
haha early in the morning u so vulgar . Tsk tsk .	 
God is soo organized and on point . Consider this :The lights go off every night ,, and come back on every morning wit .	 
thinking its time to turn in for the night plenty work to get on with tomorrow then a fun weekend of antennas .	 
Excited for Saturday night now :D	 
so i forgot my shoes at my house smh , i need some better plans for tonight any suggestions ?!	 
My drive today--it 's beautiful out here ! 
cuz u r awesome@alysonschafer Getting ready to speak to a near sold out crowd at holland bloorview tonight !	 
Forecast for Friday Night :	 
An evening of Prosecco with Glen Baxter and a bunch of Gorey originals . It wasn't a shabby end to work 
We hear that Jersey Shore 's will be in Ames on March 5 . Club Element to be exact .	 
Check out today 's feature on Eric Alder 
Antivirus 2011 Digital Defenders - PCWorld Today 's new threats demand a new breed of antivirus software . Our l . 
I am a man who walks alone And when I'm walking in a dark road At night or strolling through the park	 
The dancers are getting ready for Big APE " Everyone Can Dance " Lost Nation Theater in Montpelier . Tonight - Jan . 
ooh sorry . =D im taking my bf jess and if she cant go jake ! but you can be my 3rd alternative !  3	 
may Jimmer be with you	 
Auburn baseball opens season ranked No . 23 in the ESPN/USA Today poll .	 
I thought it was 1 but then i just checked and it said 4 . u tryin to get up for a few tonight ?	 
Morning Bli .  ) good morning beautiful , yep you dont have to ask , it 's you !	 
You'll have your calendar tomorrow ! Did you watch this morning ?	 
U missed it yesterday ! . No More ?	 
you've just tagged a random , you meant , lol . Where is he ?! Was only thinking of him today actually !	 
mobile site but not sure if I'm on tonight .	 
Four nights out on the trot . thankfully its Friday tomorrow . a night in !	 
Be back tonight 	 
Brilliant presentation  from tonight ! Great meeting everyone ! Thanks for coming down , hope fun was had	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Sharks , Friend or Foe ? One Student 's Educational Experience In August we were fortunate to be able to stay at t . 
were still " together " i have to talk to him today . or sometime i'm done talking to him over text messages then seeing him .	 
Another responsibilities to do today . To bike or to bus ?	 
i can not believe that Feb . 11 is comming so fast . but i cannot wait ! !	 
thanks for the tips . I think I looked at that site yesterday as well , lol . It seems every site gives a different answer .	 
i aint takin no night classes next quarter !	 
Oh girl I was not talking bout right now lol Ooooh , What time in the morning ?  )	 
I'm the girl . You're the boy . You text me first or we don't talk today . 
you're welcome . If you think of anything don't hesitate to ask . I may just surprise you lol	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
New music video for My Ugly Mouth officially released today Subscribe to our channel .	 
im sleepy but when i go to bed im in for DA night  [ Like it ? ]	 
JFL - ALL . Tonights the night ! If you still have JFL Equip pls bring it up to the kc hall now . Thx	 
DENVER , CO This just in ! I am headed your way ! In May ! | Most exciting thing ever !	 
I got complimented on my armpits today . I felt flattered .	 
I just love when morning gets here , cuz i can send a Great Big Good Morning sms to my dearest . wht a lovely way to start a day	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
ooh very happy scales day this morning . . . I know when I wake up feeling hungry I'm going to weigh less- isn't that odd .	 
Im gonna finish cleaning up my house today	 
Two more must see vids in today 's Producer 's Day picks Have you made your entry yet ?	 
. I just read the . Masterpiece . You've always had a positive message but this is beyond . Can't wait for Feb . 13	 
super sadness  Sad news for fans . It has been postponed until Feb 4th .	 
mo . mo . mo . morning ! ~ :D Rain 's song with beloved roommate XD	 
Freak in the Mornin Freak in the Evening	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Packing for the Seton Hill show tomorrow with ! SO pumped for this show .	 
hahahaha i love watching germany 's twitter trends . today 's favorite 
Harriet Harman wants Labour to tap into southern indignation in May 
Calvin Harris fits into today 's ambiance , weirdly . 
Tomorrow 's Friday , and Tonite their is a new Episode of Vampire Diaries ! Omg ! AND is coming out in 15 days ! WHOA !	 
I really dislike that I already have an assignment due tomorrow .	 
Anger :" In your anger do not sin "Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry ,  
Houston Rockets vs . Dallas Mavericks Expect a Shootout in Texas Tonight The Dallas Mavericks w . 
Im in concert with Ice Cube March 13th ! Come check me out . ------ 
leans down and kisses her sweetly a few times* I won't enforced after 5 tonight . You look rather beautiful-	 
Guess I'm going to get drunk as fuck and forget everything else tonight . 
know you're the Jeopardy guru but I cannot wait to hear your reaction to final Jeopardy question tonight 	 
shit . saw and thought tomorrow 's world was coming back 	 
It may be only 630 but I'm heading to bed . Talk to everyone tomorrow .	 
O_o In case yall didnt know I will be singing tonight at Open Mic Night !	 
wow , the SIA was not a very welcoming place for media aside from a very few vendors . Not returning tomorrow . 
Got my internship ! My 5th grade teacher at my Elementary school 	 
They might as well just let us stay home tomorrow . There would be no purpose in goin to school .	 
I just got some tickets to see Brian Greene talk at Uvic on Feb 1st . Really looking forward to it	 
Here 's the deal clouds , you keep snowing until school is canceled tomorrow and i will love you forever . 	 
A good cold morning ! ^^ Thank God it 's Friday ! Let 's make this day an enjoyable day ! Take care and God bless ! ^_^	 
- It 's over at 1 but this one is in Fairfax which is an hour away , plus traffic . i get surgery next monday .	 
Here 's to Dara Quilty ! Night time radio will never be the same !	 
Apparently X factor won best talent show at TV awards last night . Aside from Britain 's Got Talent who else even qualifies for that category ?	 
Montgomery College closed tomorrow !	 
just one more bottle then off to bed . had a nice night destressing and watching movies 
oh man , are you guys still playing ? I'm feeling a long night of ahead .	 
It was truly my pleasure . Blondie .)@Noeliaa10 holy I don't even Recognize myself :o lol had fun today ! Thanks Greg !	 
Lol , okay ! I know the school district really shouldn't have made a day off on a Wednesday out of all days . Haha . tmrw . :]	 
Today was horrible day for me . .	 
Will not getting any writing done today as it 's been hijacked .	 
so my god daughter baby shower saturday I'm not going cus my hair not donee .	 
. i took my piercing out for the 1st time . lmao . i was scared as hell .	 
Happy as shit there 's no school tomorrow 	 
excited bout this cafe food tonight !	 
alright , night 's ruined . Going to sleep .	 
To Wpg friends of Michael Van Rooy , there will be an open mic at Aqua Books tonight for any who would like to gather , re .	 
i have my global mid term tomorrow morning -___________-	 
What 's up for tonight ? Don't really wanna be here .	 
that guy on american idol last night ( 
you don't eat dinner on other nights ? Dinner tonight , yay ! Karaoke after , double yay !	 
Good morning all ! 	 
Hello Ms . Oracene ! How are you feeling now ? I hope you are recovering well from that jetlag . How was your day today ? 
is stressed . whoever says that being a teacher is easy needs to be knocked the f out . sorry but I just feel that way today !	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
i wish smoke was comin tomorrow too lol	 
So my cousin is ranked the 8th most sexiest cheerleader in the nfl on the top 10 list -- govt/social i need it 
I'm sick !  I got a fever today ugh ! How 's life ?	 
act like your a working man . I did 8 hours of work in 5 hours today	 
5 . If this is your first night on Twitter , you have to Tweet . 
Midfielder Jack Wilshere was last night told by Capello he represents " the future " of England	 
Join + other local activists for Thirsty Thursdays tonight 6pm at Manny 's  low key w/ p .	 
I was looking at Fat Andy today , and there was an ad on the side and it said " clothes for beautiful plus sized women " xD !	 
My tweet game slum today .	 
Kinda disappointed that I couldn't start my internship today . Hopefully the weather will be better tomorrow .	 
7-10 bio lab on Thursday nights fuuuuuuuu	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
Movie Trailer The first trailer for ' Jackass 3.5 'Do you like this story ? Paramount has announced that April 1 . 
its a friday wth just let us out already	 
Night twitter . so tired ., need to sleep .!	 
mini bottles are a must on a night out	 
cereal in the afternoon 3	 
oh , hdr fusion app 's free today . its my fave .	 
Today in 1967 Treaty signed banning military use of nuclear weapons in space	 
Wish it was tomorrow already	 
that I am today :D	 
But . I guess this fried chicken will do for tonight .	 
The insomnia fixed at the weekend suddenly . and now i'm tweeting more again . must be connected . Night	 
looking forward to tonight 's cookbook planning summit with beth dooley and mette nielson . we'll be on the look out for recipe testers !	 
Is Jay-z gon show his face at the game tonite#randomthought	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home fro ." and got Part 3-MISSING ! Try it 
shouts to for adding that new Jazmine Sullivan " 10 Seconds " and Bobby V 's " Words " to my playlist today 
is crazy ! He 's going at another celeb tonight . I'm sure there will be more than one tonight 
returns tonight after the longest hiatus , ever .  Prepare to have your timelines full .	 
Because classes were cancelled today ! That made my day	 
you have watched 72 minutes of video today . please wait 40 minutes . damn you megavideo . damn you to hell !	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:18 51 PM	 
Happy to be a part of Testa 's Banquet Facility open house on Feb 12th !	 
I hate going to Makati in the morning . ugh !	 
Good morning everyone ! TGIF and i feel so handsome today . just for today . :' )	 
Good morning sweetie ! =)	 
Love ' em . I go a lot . So much cock . Love getting used there . Had 5 guys rubbing themselves over my face on Tuesday	 
Working 1st job on Wall St standing at the teletype when the news came over	 
WIN a FREE silver pendant for Valentine 's Day . Just follow us and this tweet to enter ! Winner will be selected F .	 
Slightly excited about maybe going out tomorrow night ! Get the Mj moves goin '	 
In the Mar/Apr edition of - Linthwaite is named as one of their top 100 venues for the 3rd year .	 
Courage is the discovery that you may not win , and trying when you know you can lose . 
No cheese and no magazines in the breakroom = shitty night haha 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home from wo ." and got Part 2-RUN ! Try it 
Jay Carney will be 3rd journalist in 36 yrs to be WH press sec -- others were Ron Nessen Tony SNOW .	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
yo yo yo . are you still gunna go to that class with me tomorrow ?	 
Today is a great day !	 
There must be an Abercrombie in this mall . I just saw a guy wearing skinny jeans and flip flops after the snow storm last night . Dedication !	 
Oooh , fess up . Good slip sites !  We are The Silliest today .	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you	 
Taco night . How ' bout you ?	 
Thx bug  --- The ' My Pink Friday ' app is actually amaze . Another reason to love 
remind me tomorrow , Some peeps here are sleeping x	 
This is the kind of night were I listen to The Who 's on vinyl , back-to-back-to-back-to-back .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Australia keen to cap lessons with 1st Asian title 
She 's awesome ! You'll see her Sunday for sure , if not before . 	 
 I wrote it at 1:30 this morning .	 
I wonder if anyone thinks of me when they can't fall asleep at night . 
a glimpse  . 
failed miserably at eating tonight , managed my starter and half my main 
yea no school tomorrow yea us lol !	 
I wonder if anyone thinks of me when they can't fall asleep at night . 
" we walk tonight "	 
no school tomorrow , I love 4 day weekends ) 
School closed tomorrow .	 
What beautiful California evening . Bumpin all the way home .	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Lmfao me as of today 
Busy night at Union Square Station NYC New York  
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
on the sun . 
something urgent going on tonight ? LMAO ! Go to the bandcamp --- themadbloggers.bandcamp.com . It should be there .	 
Official high in today .  
I am looking to use it in 5th grade and I am testing it with a faculty group 
Five biggest stories in social media , tech and Business this morning 
All new First 48 tonight at 9 	 
u still got me tomorrow ?	 
I did not , but will do so tonight . What up Mr Professional ?	 
FNL just made me cry for the 3rd time this week	 
Finishing up my message for homiletics 2 for tomorrow . " hungry , why wait ?"	 
two care lovin ' in the morning ! two care lovin ' in the evening !	 
Working on projects - you know you may need to take a break when you look up to see - Yikes !	 
Tonight 's Def Jam Cipher show has been rescheduled to Monday night due to inclement weather . All tix will be honored	 
I saw three sets of identical twins at costco today , but then again everything comes in bulk there	 
Early bird registration for the Ontario Envirothon ends January 31st ! What is Envirothon ? check it out - .	 
drummed  for the first time in awhile today . I feel better now but will definitely be sore later	 
" Never do today that which will become someone else 's responsibility tomorrow ." - David Brent	 
If you have been affected by flooding join the The Flood Relief Webinar . At 7pm on Friday 4th of February a joint . 
taken some sleeping pills so hopefully i'll get some sleep tonight . not slept properly for 2 weeks .	 
1 million people in egypt will be going in the street today	 
Yes it is , Ill be there tomorrow . We should hang .	 
A little too early in the morning .	 
Yes love !  with Fox Avenue in The Academy on Feb 25th x	 
Please see the article about LOH today in the East Valley Tribune 
Yes its true . its my birthday sunday , i turn 47 .	 
Its my birthday today i really want you to wish me a ! Pretty please 333	 
Baby , please don't go . - If I wake up tomorrow , will you still be here ? 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Oh will you quit that . It 's hard to talk to people when twitter is lagged into yesterday . Cause I said that to you 2 hrs ago 	 
Wanted to run for Mrs sophomore but realized the deadline was yesterday 
Where are you ? And I am so sorry , I cannot sleep , I cannot dream tonight	 
It 's was a long and stressful day :/ friday why do you take so long to come ?	 
what about having jan to may to ease them in ? assuming they are then ' used to ' rigours of PL for next season .	 
Organic gardening calendar for February 
Mandela second night in hospital 
Just for you ! New extended customer service hours . If you have questions , I'm available by email or phone from 9AM - 9PM Mon . - Sat .	 
Ever played ball ? You know this kid Check this video -- My Coach Sucks Got this from the skipper today . LMAO	 
spent my afternoon at the juvenile courthouse detention center . may start teaching yoga classes to teens there next month	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
I am =^ Ill be in Dallas for Superbowl week Tue , Wed , Sun . Who else is going to be there ?	 
omg i cant believe you remembered . i might have to work on sat but if i dont where u wanna eat at ?	 
LIsten to the 1st 2 min of this . Kevin Mike'l make fun of me 	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walkin ." and got Part 11 Not Possible .! Try it 
it 's 8th grade hoops everybody makes a run !	 
back in september /3 
Off to the LFW networking event tomorrow 
looking for a ride from the hotel to Skysong tomorrow for fri session , I will chip in $	 
Game tonight vs CAL at 8pm . Glad to be back home in the Bay . Watch it on FSN tonight	 
The subject is what we talked about yesterday well txt me the subject of which ur nervous about	 
Hmm . That I couldn't do . But we've done tours before where I could you get a UG on a Tuesday/Wed/Thurs night .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
How are you today ?	 
we notice , try tomorrow ( :	 
I wanted to buy a snapback today but they didnt have any there -_-	 
good luck for today ! let me know how the interview goes !  ill keep my fingers crossed for you !	 
I've probably posted more today than the entire time I've been on twitter	 
Dance party tonight to benefit GLBT History Museum at Public Works ! 
Great meetings so far today . few more before 
I try to be specific . EG " You did really great when you put your head under water at swim today I'm proud of you ."	 
Just Had a Good Dinner With Family Called It A Night God Bless You All .	 
today  has been one crazy busy , work filled , rollercoster of a cold ass snowy day ! I dont even know how to feel rt now	 
It will be a night of hoops . Miami/NY Celtics/Portland . 
Food-Allergic Children May Feel Unsafe In Schools New research shows young people who have experienced life-thr . 
Why arent you happy  The w'end is nearly here and today the C 's are going to kick some Portland ass 	 
Sad to see end , but excited to start working on world 2011 Monte Carlo in July and world 2012 in Miami next January ! Be there !	 
Had a lovely relaxing night	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
hey bro sad day for me . bill cowher is an option ? See u tomorrow am .	 
I've been so unproductive today	 
KILLED jeopardy tonight .	 
So by Monday I will def be living WAY closer and everyone who used distance as there excuse better have there ass at my new spot !	 
Sydney , it was special . Hot muggy but amazing . THANK YOU ! Melbourne we shall reunite on Sunday 
" do you wanna go to a church sleepover tomorrow ?" " wtf ? are we gonna read the bible then test each other on moses ?"	 
so today my sisters ran into stonys claiming that they were being stalked . .	 
If your fansite/blog is outside of the United States , please include your country where located . Need this info by t .	 
New on tonight ! So excited ! 	 
I ended up with Jimmy Johns for dinner . I couldn't take another can of soup today . SO MUCH SOUP .	 
Now the confession :I only knew my husband for 6 months before we decided to run to Ohio and get married , why may u ask so soon ?	 
It may be well to consult others before taking unusual actions . in bed	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Special late night tweet	 
working hard on bookings for Craft Fair at Edwinstowe Notts . on 27th March . Still same spaces for certain Crafts det .	 
Her lip gloss , her perfume , her nails , her hair , let her kno u noticer she wasnt wearing bangs today	 
i figured , and we all know what will be doing tonight lol	 
hey just got home from a busy night at work ! Can ya please please please tweet me back ! Love ya lots x	 
vou ver e bed time !  night 3	 
Tomorrow , I start a huge project . Scary but fun !	 
explore your fantasies Tonight in Maine 
whose playing 7th ?	 
Word out of Japan that Horse of the Year Buena Vista may target the Dubai World Cup , without a prep race . You go girl ! .	 
Look at the sky now ! There 's a rainbow ! Ah , friday 	 
trying . had thar peel yesterday .	 
when can we run together fool !? I did a nice 4 mile trot the other night on some ice !	 
We're supporting San Carlos ' mom 's night out tonight by extending a 10% discount if anyone uses the code MOM with the bartender until 7pm	 
So , job interview on Monday ! Super excited . Need haircut , shave and sprucing up . Gotta nail this one !	 
As a your genuine tie to the past is strong and it may be something you feel you have to care for .	 
Here 's a rainbow for a Thursday ! 
Enjoyable afternoon and evening .	 
Time for sleep . My eyes will not stay open . Absolutely pooping my pants about tomorrow :/	 
You did ?! Aw man . Lol . You know what , I've heard that about ATL . I definitely am . I may to come and check it out !	 
Don't forget our 3 course bistro dinner . Available every night of the week for $25 .	 
, whats the story behind the name " Jimmer " in 140 chars . or less .? btw , good game last night . 
The Milano/SEABONE undersea cable appears to be intact . However the connection appears to have been pulled by TE Data . .	 
Fridays tomorrow ! And Im finally gonna pick up my check that 's just been sittin at work smh	 
Friday morning , smile for others , smile for your self 	 
The very second Nick Levine Movie Night concludes , we are having Nick Levine Book Club .	 
U can have it morning , noon , night . Sounds good , 100 barrel series beers have overall been very solid , this looks similar	 
even though I'm getting a free dinner at my bible study tonight , I'm kinda hankering for a burger .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
-smiles , looking at you- Care to sleep in my bed tonight ? I promise to God i wont try anything .	 
Sounds like some chica 's panties will be off tonight .	 
A morning spent doing our accounts - what a fun filled day so far !	 
i'm voting now . he 's still in 3rd place .	 
May your chains set lightly upon you ; and may posterity forget that ye were our countrymen	 
Working a lil longer today than usual , considering either a meatball marinara or a sub club from subway for dinner . 
Who do you think will win on monday night football your chance to win $100 go here before the season is up 
it 's Friday and still no contact from network guys . You have until COB tonight and then I'll write official complaint .	 
Kayleigh I mailed off your V-day card earlier today	 
how do I get tickets to go see your show at U of I in feb	 
ill probably do it tomorrow instead !	 
Protest Outside Egyptian Embassy in Tomorrow Jan 29 at 11AM Join this page for more Info 
Got off work early for once today ! Celebrating my " 21st " bday tonight . Woo thought this day would never come !	 
vampires hunt me out tonight ?	 
how is everyone today have a good day	 
ballin right now 4 3's.if he hit 6 in da 1st den he might as well do da 
It pays to open mail that you think may be junk . I had a check almost threw it away . $$$ boing	 
Heading out to buy my date for tonight . Neti pot , don't let me down !	 
Detroit Lions 2011 Draft Trade Down Analysis Now , if the Jets trade David Harris to Detroit , swap their 1st ro . .	 
See Your Credit Report here = to the home owners , the girls w . the diplomas enough mon .	 
unfortunately I'm leaving back to Cairo Saturday morning ! so Good Luck and make us proud 	 
You may . I have plenty . remember the door is open and beer in the fridge .	 
heck yeah . Take work off on the 12th . My band is playing .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
You are in the dentist ? Problem with your tooth ? I will watch tonight .	 
that sounds solid i'm in , i'll hit you up when i'm out of class tomorrow	 
i know evan said it , but again great great night . urlacher !	 
I'm tired so I'm going to sleep  night 33	 
11 more days till February 7th ! Let 's grow the and get us to 1000 subscribers ! 
Goal for the night . in bed by 9 ! 
Going back to Chicago tomorrow for an interview at the place works . Let 's see what happens . Oh , and I'm going to Quimby's.	 
cheers mate . It 's better then it was last night . More stiff then anything I think	 
Aaah . Morning air . Gentle Rain . Walking Meditation . Atisha 's smile . Pure heaven in the here and now . May my per .	 
Congratulations to the graduating that are finishing up their last practice tonight ! 
will be away in Malaysia from 1st - 8th Feb . to be submitted on the 10th . lol . how am I supposed to do my work . so awesome .	 
today is Sport Day !	 
I got it at the mall today .	 
LOL ! I know the feeling . My fam wants to go to the library tonight . I have a stack of books that I need to review b/f I return them	 
Stephanie Ellis will be 1-4 PM tomorrow  with chair massage ! YEA !	 
Listen up guys , if you don't watch The Vampire Diaries tonight , you're gonna regret it !	 
so today Gym , eat , then jersey fuckin shore  r they bring out the grenade whistle today er wat ?	 
it was a day at home , i still feel like shit . but im going to school tomorrow either way	 
Who is coming to MY BDAY BASH this saturday night at America 's Pub ?	 
' He notice the gun , and his rage grew inside . He said , " I'll avenge my lover tonight !' He Is We Kiss It All Better	 
Eating breakfast for dinner tonight . Sounds good	 
I'm the girl . You're the boy . You text me first or we don't talk today . 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
First time subbing in 2011 at this Sunday , Jan . 30th , 1:30 -3pm ! Brand new mvmnt to challenge ur brain .	 
I felt sick today , sorry guys - I'll make update tomorrow morning , so brace yourselves 	 
Idol then the shore . good night !	 
friday the fourth work ? Five maybe ? In ocon .	 
Epic morning assembly ( maths now .	 
it 's my 17th birthday today 
lemme finish this homework so ican see what im going to wear saturday .	 
Thursday , I don't care about you .	 
we will definitely going to do it tonight . Okay Katie ? Go !	 
Luckily I wouldn't even have that class til Monday but I at least need to get my book tomar .	 
wow ! That 's an odd reversal . SO nice out today in SF .	 
Hasan Ali may face several cases 
If you believe in love tonight , i will show you one last time .	 
Montgomery County Public Schools are closed tomorrow 	 
not at all you were being mean today	 
Anything off " Discovery " by Daft Punk . My favorite album to run to at night is OK Computer by Radiohead . Great night running tunes .	 
Newcastle stepped up tonight ! You just get better and better and better ! Love you guys ! See you again next week ! Marv x	 
Don't forget ! There 's a new episode of TONIGHT at 8PM on Fox !	 
If your gonna follow anyone today , make it especially if you need quality hosting .	 
Both teams stil looking to find their stride as they have combined for 21 turnovers and just 10 baskets . Hofstra 15 , 8 7:51 1st half	 
Hit some icy spots on the Interstate today that scared the shit out of me . Thought I was going to eat it ! Had to clean out my underwear !	 
Excited about Pink ladies night tonight !	 
Egyptian Interior Ministry warns it will take " decisive measures " tomorrow . Serious violence guaranteed now . 
Happy 18th Hun ! Long life and prosperity !  We thank GOD	 
Don't forget -- mummy program on Sat !  
. or suggest our Twitter feed to your twitter friends ? Share the joy of free candy this Friday ! 
I'm very bored and anxious today . Still need to watch Knockdown , but can't sit still .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I want to go to the travis porter party tonight .	 
Finally get to watch my team tonight !	 
Ready for Friday .	 
lmao i wanna go to 3rd hour 3	 
do any egg cartons today still look this cool ? 
all i know is.i'm demanding a two hour delay tomorrow . and if i don't get one ; i refuse to go to school	 
Me ' So , this guy sang a Script song on Idol last night ' Husband ' Which one ? Live Like We're Dying ?'	 
so exhausted ! did pas de deux at school today  but now my feet hurt and im gonna go dance for a few more hours . imma die .	 
I saw a elderly lady today . and she was pregnant	 
Good luck calling it . The debate is getting hotter . Exploring that complexity may be too much to ask in some quarters .	 
Facebook Phones Set to Debut Yesterday , HTC announced that they will be debuting two Facebook-bra . 
Off to Cornwall tomorrow morning . It 's apparently 273 miles away .	 
Great day off workouts Jesus is kicking a$$ now time for nutrition  off training some more tonight !	 
Good times  Never Say Never by Reminds me of the text I got this morning from 	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home fro ." and got Part 3-MISSING ! Try it 
Oh god . may disappoint me come Monday .	 
what you get today ? who did it ? This yo first tattoo	 
listening to Good Morning Heartache by Billie Holiday on 
Or are you still on a high from Jimmer 's performance last night ? Everything looks delicious together in a world w/ Jimmer	 
" If you do not change direction , you may end up where you are heading ." Lao Tzu	 
Starting Dexter season 3 tonight , can't believe we waited this long	 
If you leave me tonight	 
jersey shore tonight 	 
So need to do laundry tomorrow . _ . That 's about two baskets of laundry to do D :	 
All Archdiocesan and Public schools in the City of will be closed tomorrow . 
everyone is going back for CNY haha . You going to shortie night ? Might pop to Leicester some time in Feb ? coming too !	 
The ' My Pink Friday iPhone App ' is also compatible with the iPod touch and your iPad ! 
What 's for supper tonight ? Anything special ?	 
Today seemed like the longest day ever at work . maybe because I'm starving lol	 
new phone today  welcome	 
girl I was up by six today !	 
Thanks to everyone who has entered our Elvis competition so far , entries close today and the winner will be announced on Tuesday . Good Luck !	 
how r u tonight ?	 
maybe time to get some rest so i can but up for work , hope everyone has a cooly night	 
I almost hit this dude on a bike today shouldn't have been in my way	 
i wouldn't mind that much but its her 2nd time to change it , and I have done all of them =(	 
All I can think about everyday is oaks and derby Smh can't wait for may . 80 degrees pleeze !	 
January 28 , 2011 Hosni Mubarak 's last day as President of Egypt 
peja definitely out tonight	 
You ain't fucking wit no rookie I'm from I'll take your cookie soufside	 
israel today | Palestinian killers of American Christian nabbed near Hebron - israel today 
Good morning , my lovely ! You were rather quick on the draw there ! I am very well , but the legs aren't! lol ! How are you ?  x	 
hello world , been downloading all kind of old music for like an hour now , ima be jamming tonight !	 
So listless today . Need to go do some more dishes . Why do I use so many when I cook ? [/whine ]	 
Where 's my Friday feeling ?	 
Busy evening . Enjoy yours !	 
3 days and counting until we say Aloha to the new Hawaii-Five-O ! Sunday 8.30 PM 
I may be over Charlie Sheen stories but I will never get sick of Stan Rosenfield 's responses	 
A couple of weak , moisture starved disturbances move thru . one late Friday , the other late Saturday . More snow action later next week ?	 
sorry ! With the exception of 30 mins today , I was in meetings 7:30 - 4:30 . Brain melt .	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
 what exam do you have tomorrow anyway ?	 
dying my skin orange for tonight 's jersey shore 
yeah that too lol GOOD evening lol i just came from track practice	 
Join us to the first Ribbon Cutting of 2011 on February 16th ! via 
Advice On How To Get A Good Night 's Sleep 
Advice On How To Get A Good Night 's Sleep 
wats up babe wat u doing tonight	 
isnt it fun when we went for our 1st time we wanted to go again we try to go once a month	 
got in trouble for not taking medicine last night . .	 
Looking forward to returning to Chicago tomorrow night for our first show ever at The Space in Evanston .	 
Glad to see Archer is back on tonight	 
have I told you today how much I love the way your skin feels pressed against mine ?	 
My weekend starts tonight and ends on monday night . 	 
I sorta can't wait for Tuesday to get back to school :D	 
I don't want to go to this event tonight I'm mad tired but a girl 
After I realised that reality and life is what you make of it =) g'night.	 
So what 's this I hear about you and a big ol ' watch .?! ; ) Thank you for posting my drama - hot bananas traffic today !	 
ok ! i will tweet you as soon as i can or i will catch you tomorrow , trying to get JB to follow me for the 30th time	 
Excited to hear OSU review of and present tonight !	 
Im in concert with Ice Cube March 13th ! Come check me out . ------ 
Hi Tim ! Last night was a very good wake up a lot from listening to your songs . Please , spend a happy day with a smile today !	 
shit tryna get into something to night	 
I just owned Jeopardy tonight . suck it Trebek	 
What setting to use to shoot night Photography without using flash for outdoor landscaping lighting company ? 
Tommorow is a mystery so let 's make today go down in history  
that 's what we were discussing when she said that ! PS I'm Casa Loma for a meeting 5pm next Thur . maybe beers after ? FBook me	 
I'm liking my view tonight ! 
I Could Watch Friday Over Over and It Will Still be Funny .	 
Snow Fun !I woke early this morning and called into my office hotline to find out if weather would be closing u . 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Can't wait to party hardy at Sneaks tomorrow ! There ain't no party like a Dudebox party ! .	 
Some treats from our broadcast yesterday . Here are our place getters ! 
TWEET ! Bloggers for dummies STILL hasn't arrived- devo ! What 's my love doing this weekend ? Sunday double bay coffee ? XXX	 
" Please allow these men to safely pursue the height of their excellence tonight ." I'd go to church if Coach Taylor was runnin ' the service .	 
i worked late . and watched it this morning ) did you watch ?	 
ii can honestly say ii miss the way me and were back in 7th grade 
Doesn't ' have ' to do anything tomorrow . Finding this fact very exciting ! 
February Community Connection Newsletter 
workin on 2nd mixtape this one is an artist feature/when it gets warm gonna do a video/my cd will be in price cutters in 2 weeks	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
it is not him . He was asked in practice today and he said no .	 
gimme a wave if ur out in LDN tonight !  ? 	 
Finally made it home . nap time so I can be energized for karaoke tonight Texas Wings	 
The snow that falls in the Neath every December is something of a mystery . Condensation from . 
so court went great today my case was dismiss im so happy cause i def wasnt going to pay no 500 dollars . -- damn -__-	 
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
You heard right . is going to be LIVE at Much on Tues Feb 1 - right here on ! Check out their Twitter .	 
Today 's clouds . Chinook clouds I think ? 
Tomorrow is gonna be . busy . . 
found a women 's shelter to get the new bedding and i'm listening to my body which is telling me to knock off work early . good night ! xo	 
Having breakfast with my good friend Denovan at The Flying Biscuit 	 
Lord , You have always lightened this darkness of mine ; and though the night is here , today I believe .	 
WTF this has been the busiest Thursday of my life . 
Do you like ? We are giving away 4 tickets to the concert at on Saturday at 11am :/ .	 
Come out tomorrow night to El Camino High School in So . S.F. to watch me rock it at Inspi . 
sounds like a very reasonable desicion then . I just felt like today was not a day for political philosophy	 
I was thinking about getting that car for my 16th , my mom likes it and they're not expensive ! I want a  
Spending a lovely night with my wife .	 
Today I think will save Australia $ 386,141 by 2pm - What 's your guess ? 
Thanks for the RTs and mentions today - awesome people 
PJ went to the vet today . Her hernia became a painful issue for her . More painful now , she had surgery to fix it .	 
I tell you to sleep so you'll be awake in the morning . It 's 11:30 and I'm sitting here waiting for you to get your lazy ass up !	 
just washed 3 cars this morning , fuck this !	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
then cant see Maryland lose again . no March madness again for turtles	 
Cheers to that ! RT@NewEras_Finest1 since the mixtape party I've been on crazy grind now digits back where it was . tonight !	 
Our 1st day of Gymnastics class ! Amiya really liked it , looks like we have a new hobby	 
Letters Opposition , intransigence and terrorism in the Middle East You publish a letter that I find shocking  , arguing .	 
That awkward moment when you walk out of your room naked and remember its Thursday and the cleaning ladys is over	 
January is already gone , time goes so fast !	 
With , finally seeing The Social Network . After tonight , I will be an informed member of society .	 
Looks like i'm surrounded by loads of babes tomorrow etc . Deep breath .	 
I promised myself I would stay sane until feb 4th . this is difficult . I want to end it all .	 
Tryna get a haircut today	 
ok , i guess . but we can still drink whiskey tonight ! 8Db	 
I'm gonna miss after the Super Bowl . I'll be looking forward to August .	 
Never put off until tomorrow what you can avoid all together	 
What have you done to warp someone 's view of reality today ?	 
I can't wait for Archer tonight ! Season 2 here I come .	 
The crazy parents and teachers are happy there 's no school tomorrow . I thought teaching are you was 1st tho - WHAT ?	 
Gorgeous day at Fort Scott for 5th grade soccer ! Scrimmage vs Hamlin from 4-5	 
Working hard at our newest future location on the corner of 9th and Weidler . Shooting to be open around . 
gota watch american idol tonight ! who 's dwn to watch w/me ?	 
Ok I'm done w/tix for today . I have a headache now lol	 
Surprisingly , that 's not the first time someone called me a greedy hooker today .	 
Every bit of me aches darn this getting fit ! Can hardly get comfy tonight	 
for people not financially stable enough to have a bank account . Or cashing in federal aid checks  .	 
Off to sch . got presentation today . wish me luck !	 
Hoosiers looking to get that upset tonight	 
to kill the bored ! you've ONLY to sleep ! SO gd night All , c u guys Tomorrow	 
Yes , exactly ! Too true . Oh , college . By the way , how bad is it in Boston right now ? Long Island got hit hard last night/today .	 
I'll crash now . All thoughts and hopes go out to the people of Egypt . Good night and not least good luck !	 
i know but trust me the people tweeting about egypt are the people tweeting on the other issues to , they may not be now b.c. like	 
I dont live up to anyones expectations As a you may think that there is no one out there that c .	 
Get a FREE download from + more of today 's bite sized news 
nothing yet , i has played every game since then . except monday henry blanco was catching .  sexy 
Getaway Event in May for Possibility Mastermind members . Spend one on one time with Kim and discover your dream life 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off , insider  
snow day tomorrow !	 
I most certainly will be praying . May the powerful act with restraint , and may the restrained gain power .	 
I'm okay . got out of work late  What 's on the TV tonight ?	 
you look so damn good today .	 
A full day of school today ! And tomorrow looks promising , too ! What is the world coming to ?	 
I got a call today from his campaign thanking me in advance for my vote . LOL	 
Going great ! Busy , but great Morning ! I'm SO excited -- counting down ! How are the preparations going ?!	 
Off to dream about some goan curries I'm gonna create tomorrow . zzzzzzz	 
Worry never never added a day to my life ever - it just robs me of today brings me down	 
happy bday ! And can I get a shout out Please ? It 's my birthday today !	 
Journalists from all over the world , Egypt needs your help Internet and phones are down after 3rd day protesting 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home fro ." and got Part 3-MISSING ! Try it 
tired , and still in a bad mood , urgh good thing its thursday . 
What Mubarak does in Egypt tomorrow will determine how soon Egyptians call for an arrest warrant as Tunisians have f .	 
Gearing up for night ! I wonder what fun surprises has in store for us tonight ! So excited I can .	 
got my iPad cover from her -- so cute ! Got coffee ? Get a cozy ! giving one away tonight . 
who said u was a dog then u callin other women sweet hearts u barely tell me good night	 
didnt work out today , doing good on calorie intake  . But . want snacks . Tried carrots . Didnt work .	 
definitely not my night tonight lol x	 
Wife 's birthday today . Happy birthday loo .	 
Vandy up 26-24 on MSU with 6:40 /1H . Looks like officials may be reviewing if last shot was a 3 instead of a 2 by VU 's John Jenkins .	 
Am so happy tomorrow is Friday	 
our site will be up in feb , but message me what your looking to order and we can go through paypal	 
has to dye my hair again . going to later tonite	 
My kids are full of energy tonite . But I gotta save mine for this weekend . Saturday is gonna be a long one .	 
forgot to remind you that today is thursday .	 
this day is turning out so great . Found out my assignment for Comm is due next Friday , not tomorrow . 
word . can you make it tomorrow night ? It 's probably the only chance I'll have to do it for a while	 
lol yea let me just turn 18 then you watch party all night baby ! 
Highschool juniors seniors , tomorrow is the last day 2 turn ur essay in for McDonald 's Black His of Tomorrow for a s .	 
is it friday yet ? 	 
Due to the inclement weather , all School District of Philadelphia Schools will be closed January 28th . ~~~@Caddy_0512	 
OneRepublic has a show on the Thursday of my Spring Break , one hour away from my house and you have to be 21 to get in . This is bullshit .	 
Here 's a rainbow for a Thursday ! 
40 degrees on Sunday in Melbourne [ Wonder if it 's a Total Fire Ban day ? ]	 
He gets off in 33 minutes . Wonder what he 's doing tonight ?	 
Check out our facebook for photos of today 's events for 
good morning ! today would be so great !	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
With all these injuries , the Mets should just call themselves the EMT's.  .	 
Bedtime folks ! Time to hit the sack as they say . N'night.	 
Today was ok . Not as bad as yesterday , but not good .	 
Anyway , I'm getting tired . Going to sleep ! Nice to talk with , today ! Talk ya tomorrow .	 
haha good call man . I was pretty pumped when I saw that this morning on the pregame breakdown .	 
Tonight 's veggie side dish corn chips and guacamole . 
lazy day at home today 3	 
BIG BANG 's concerts at Seoul Olympic Stadium in Jan 2010 will be screened in Japan as a 3D movie starting Feb 19 
hahahaha I'll do ! :D i hope that ! I hope to be there in july/august ! :D	 
I'm sad for the people who won't know about this until tomorrow when it 's time , and will turn on the TV in good faith . | 
And if three of the things have to be done by Saturday ? Oy !	 
I take it you're going to watch JLH 's movie on CBS on Sunday ?	 
Miami University Admission Feb 1 is almost Here !Right now we're getting set to mail out decisions to Early Ac . 
Gosh tonight sucks . I might have gotten a lot done but i would trade it all to not be lonely .	 
Headed home . Rockin to some cage the elephant . Good day today .	 
Good morning everyone ! It 's cold today . Have nice day 
You were superb on Vinnie tonight - really clear , impressive and interesting . Desperately needed to sleep but st .	 
we notice , try tomorrow ( :	 
Now running away from twitter . have a good night ! ;-) ))	 
to RSVP for the show next week Feb 2 go HERE ! 
No school for me again tomorrow ! That means I had a 5 day weekend !	 
Farnsworth Replica Photoshoot - I spent this morning doing some product photography for the Farnsworth . .	 
in my 2nd playthrough 
but i wanna c the 6th man . that shit was funny	 
hosting our annual Tao-A-Go-Go ! Going to be a huge night !	 
You're invited to my high-energy Power Networking event in London ON Feb 1st . 
Best bets for today are up thanks to Be sure to check them out at Good luc .	 
Tomorrow it goes down at suno has talent ! will be performing and I will be filming live . be there ! rt	 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
Hey , Id love u to follow me  Night  x	 
If you need to get out tonight come see us at the Acadia Cafe in Minneapolis , we're on at 8:45 PM ( :	 
I'm depressed after tonight 	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
horrible night , sometimes my job SUCKS .	 
Haven't planned any jokes tonight , but I'll try and wing it 
Organic gardening calendar for February - Fort Worth Star Telegram 
Dog Found Frozen In Block Of Ice  /For pets lovers , it 's one u may want 2 avoid . Unfathomable . 
SHIRTS ON SALE ! Tonight we are selling our shirts for only $7 dollars ! 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Why is everyone off tomorrow but me ? UArts , what the Hell .	 
I think me and should drop his song he doing on FEB . 11 . !	 
SK&H 's employees enjoyed broccoli and bacon quiche for today . 
. obvious attempt to blame fires on protesters tomorrow ! PLEASE spread !	 
you should come to 11 tomorrow	 
If you wanted to go to school so bad , then wake up early tomorrow and go sit in front of the school .	 
shattered Night all x	 
hope u girls had fun tonight ! I wanted 2 keep dancin !	 
Tons of new items today check it out 
No . Not until next Friday , now .	 
someone should drive me to Disneyland right now . i wanna see underoath tonite	 
More melting in Greenland may slow glacier flow 
Tickets Going Fast for " Big Monday " Battle with Texas 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Marines may be entitled to JP Morgan Chase settlements Jonathan Rowles and JP Morgan Chase came to a close , wit . 
what are ya'll gettin into tonight ?	 
im glad ii got school tomorrow	 
just this boy I've been seeing slept at his house last night he 's very cute	 
Took me 2 hrs this AM 
I do everyday and night . Are you doing the Set Show ?	 
Jersey shore tonight cant wait !	 
Very excited to go out tonight with the Ladies for dinner and drinks ! 
Nah , can't afford it . Sun 's out . Loving it ! oh I am on my way then ! Got that pool boy yet ?	 
DALLAS ! COME MEET ME Clinic Field at NFL Experience at Dallas Convention Center  Ill be hanging out a .	 
Drew eliminates Clemson , will pick from 3 SEC schools Friday 
Good morning Prince ~ ~ Come to Taiwan , you patrol it	 
i'm there in spirit stevie ! just got an exam tomorrow and kind of in the wrong part of the country .	 
Smh all the spice gurls trippin out today lol	 
showers over most areas today !  should i bring my big umbrella ? decisions decisions decisions	 
well just checked into room in the city . might have pool party tomorrow	 
saw a turbocharged pickup today	 
Don't forget Deadline to register for Discovery Weekend is THIS SUNDAY , January 30 .	 
CarWash wasHING my denaLI cruiSe niGht yeaH	 
" So since it 's no school what am I Doin tomorrow ?"	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
thanks my man ! It is crazy how fast time goes ! Feels like it was just my 21st in toledo	 
I love my softball team . Tomorrow were . Going hard in the paint lol .	 
Free tax-prep services available starting Friday The IRS and various local organizations will kick off tax season . 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
I may not play as much basketball as I used to but my passion love for it will never change !	 
" Strangers in the night . exchanging lances ." CALEB from BLOOD .	 
667 rolls of sushi were eaten 667 photos were taken on my camera last night . 
Don't forget Deadline to register for Discovery Weekend is THIS SUNDAY , January 30 .	 
Oh yea its Jersey Shore night	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
In here with my blood brother OCD he spending the night	 
Um ? Someday ' talking cars ' may save lives via 
The Story of the Newest School Board Member Virginia Pollard joined the panel in October , but her story of help . 
33 degrees tomorrow ! 
Posh tonight at the Rev Room enuff said . 
Today wasn't so bad	 
Over work for today	 
naked , she sat up and her busy fingers loosened his belt , pushing his trousers down .	 
Wow I've been quite productive today . A few blog posts done , some link building , emails almost caught up . Now working on a consulting gig .	 
Judge denies motion to dismiss term-limit lawsuit 	 
My Thursday 's have officially become borin af	 
Let me teach you the logic behind today ; 1.11 . 11 . Take your birth year  + it to the age you turn this y .	 
Swimming for the little one . for me .  
" It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !"	 
gonna record american idol . dont feel like watching it tonight . :\	 
let the rain wash away all the pain of yesterday- Diddy Dirty Money lol 	 
Wish I was there tonight , but I'll settle for tomorrow in Seattle and Saturday in Portland . Can't wait ! 
Would using only concealer and no foundation or powder be enough .Jan 27 , 2011 . so i have lupus and due t . 
I'm more than happy for the trade ! I . Need some sun desperately xxx	 
yep I've been painting day and night . just had albert for a bit of company 0 (	 
That 's nice . How about doing something to prevent that ? US officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
Woohoo ! Accomplished everything I wanted to today . Hope tomorrow goes the same . Always makes me feel better .	 
Friday work , sat chk-in to my surprise , sun Gary birthday , Monday I am one Yr older	 
I hope is lucky tonight ! 	 
party all night sleep all day - sean kingston	 
Never ! I made mine this morning	 
CJ Louisville Assembly to get new plant manager Monday 
IF you're watching Idol tonight-keep an eye out for my cousin Joshua Tryon ! He looks nothing like me , but he 's awesome .	 
really need something to do tonight	 
 Never Again Jan 27 is Holocaust remembrance Day 
Dinner and movie with family ! Gotta love family night !	 
Mandela spends second night in hospital 
Follow me on Twitter for a chance to win an autographed copy of my new album ! - Give-Aways tonight at 9pm EST	 
Is pumped for this eventful , courageous , and exciting day tomorrow . :D	 
Just did my singing callback :' ( My god my voice cracked and oh no it was horrible . X l Why did I have to be sick today !?!? 
The past should be left in the past . Live life for what tomorrow has to offer , not for what yesterday has taken away . .	 
You may use this site to search for jobs , match you skills , you can do from home Hope it helps .	 
It 's thursday what are we drinkin ?	 
I must get them done tomorrow .	 
What 's the today . I ain't go in on one in a minute !	 
Love that movie . If you dig road comedies , White Wedding is worth checking out . It just came out on DVD today .	 
Why is it my daughter passes out in LR each evening but then refuses to sleep in her bed ?	 
Hey folks , pls send good vibes to - still recovering from weather challenges , won't be at KCC this Sat .	 
Shore and Illini game tonight . not bad	 
My sons birthday is saturday . He said me he wants sausage , biscuits , pancakes , and eggs for breakfast . Eat much . He'll be for by the wa y	 
Good news about my knee . I've managed to bend it 40 degrees from horizontal today without pain or discomfort !	 
lol he played like some of the 1st 7-10 games . But after that he got hurt again	 
But with my imagination , the dreams are SWEET . Last night , and Rammstein . Win !	 
Look for Hammerhead Decaf Honduras drip at the B'ham Theatre Guild 's production of MacBeth , Jan 28th-Feb 13th . For . 
goin down march 27th	 
so is there anything going on tonight ?	 
nothing . just eating and watching the first 48 . did you waste your day today ? or are you back to your schedule ?!	 
Surely a staged finale on Tuesday afternoon with speeches from all leaders and then off to see Mary ?	 
Awesome !  Lol I did Mrs . Sanchez thank you ! Lecture was great today 	 
UFC 126 's Belfort on split with trainer Tompkins " It was a very easy decision "Vitor Belfort today said a . 
KRLD just informed us that our show is now solidly the most listened to show on Saturday Mornings ! Thank You for . 
Good Luck tonight in your match I dont think you will need it I have Sour gummie worms BTW	 
heading to school :/ but hopefully drinks with megan tonight !	 
c'mon, say hi to me , please . :/	 
I'm not at home to see raffle info . Is there a deadline ? I'll buy next Friday 	 
I get 10,000 new inspired followers plus every week may I unravel to you how to aquire them as your followers 
It 's so f'in cold in the house ! Stayin ' in tonight . Probably going to track another song for practice tomorrow .	 
Off to bed now peeps night x	 
Oh , we could do this forever .  Can hardly wait to see what you hit us with tomorrow . 	 
Got to take care of daddy ! I know my sisters are gonna look so beautiful tonight 
If Bryant even considers Pitt over Mich he may not BR intelligent enough to go to school at Mich@TomVH Pitt  
I would actually love to see in concert for the 3rd time shame i didnt no :\ 3 3 3 3 3 3 3	 
Tomorrow will be out at the tennis court supporting the Tennis Team in their match vs Jville State	 
I cant even see tomorrow . Ugh .	 
Wow AMZN , down 10% AH . It 's because I returned my Kindle first week of January , sorry guys ! // I hope you feel bad about that	 
edward in the night .	 
Yo son , Heat vs Knicks tonight , you tryna post up for that ?	 
Can't sleep my bed is so cold tonight	 
ready to tonight ?	 
so excited I just got an electric blanket . Cant wait to get a good night sleep . After todays experiences I realized how blessed I truly am .	 
Dude I'm having spaghetti for dinner tonight . I'll be thinking of you . Btw what happened ?	 
. Tierra finally came back today ! It 's been like what ? 5 weeks ? !	 
It 's Ladies Night and the Feelin 's Right Genki -Prado . All appetizers are half price for the Ladies ! Because that 's how we ROLL !	 
meant to hit 38 today !	 
SEVA ranked 11th in VA in latest USA Swimming Virtual Club Rankings . Up from last year . Virginia Swimming 's most rapidly improving team !	 
FACT The regime in shut down the Internet in an attempt to silence the voices of the 1 million people protesting .	 
other cry worthy moments ) time traveler 's wife for the x# of times ) that man caring for his fiance w/TBI on AI last night .	 
wow how good was McCarthy today . Wow some great insight	 
May i skip today ?	 
Now wouldn't that be a privilege . a morning run with digital media celebrity , !	 
Sorry , you've now got me thinking about Louise Jameson in a bustle . I may have to go and have a lie down .	 
its Irah 's birthday on Sunday !	 
Its been a rough parenting week . TGIF tomorrow !	 
Anyone at tonight . and wants some free T&D shit . find us ! The game is afoot .	 
I want to be February 11 for the premiere of Justin Bieber !	 
Okay , time to prep for tomorrow 's board of directors meeting . Great group of Jayhawks	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
Today was good .	 
Can't wait to watch the nicki and drake video premier tonight and jersey shore !	 
Real Housewives of Beverly Hills reunion tonight !	 
tonight is all electric and we are all connected 	 
Going to be so exhausted tomorrow . /care	 
Okay , jump starting homework tonight . I'm gonna try to get an hour of exercising in too !	 
awesome news Greeter 's tomorrow - Jan . 28th Tomorrow ' Greeter 's meeting is hosted by Mid-Valley Mentors at Nor . ht .	 
the first time i was in the 9th grade and he didnt get me anything and didnt talk to me the whole day =/	 
" Nothing 's going fast enough tonight , nothing will satisfy your appetite ."	 
enjoy ! Speak to you tomorrow , wish you a safe journey and a productive day .	 
I'm a week and a half behind on e-mails . If . you just give me till Saturday , I'll be sure to properly disappoint with a cryptic reply .	 
1 month before us just across the lake ! // Tentative date for Great Lakes THATCamp 2011 is 4/30 	 
Thanks God It 's Me Thanks God It 's Friday 
which one of you hoes spilled red drink on my white shoes last night*	 
Hasan Ali may face several cases Hasan Ali Khan , the absconding Pune-based businessman , could be charged under . 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
aye come by tomorrow bruh	 
I don't know but what I know is that yesterday a sushi delivery man that came was EXACTLY LIKE YOU . And I shock .	 
I figured that . I had that on repeat yesterday . lol	 
I may of invented the worlds first completely transparent animal !	 
New concept launches anticipated at 3rd Abu Dhabi Yacht Show as .Some of the global superyacht industry 's mo . 
777 line move begins at 7:30 tonight	 
Im going to see it sunday . if youre lying liam ill hunt you down .	 
Don't be a drag , just be a queen . rejoice and love yourself today , cause baby you were Thank you xx	 
Remember everyone , tomorrow , total points+my pts+ Kurt 's rebounds , win $50 to Converse and a signed shoe . Post .	 
" Don't judge each day by the harvest you reap but by the seeds that you plant ." -Robert L . Stevenson . Ready to plant your .	 
I went to the beach with Emi today and we watched the sunset . It was . nice .	 
The internet movie gods have determined that I won't see the rest of Hornet 's Nest tonight . :' (	 
One class tomorrow which is an exam and then going to look at apartments	 
maybe tomorrow if I log on again . If I forgive you . If I want to speak to you . If I'm here .	 
I may need to alter my courses for next semester , and I'm just tired of sitting herre and doin it , am paining !	 
Your ' kiss-up ' attitude to Alfie 's parents was brilliant in today 's episode , being head boy , haha . =) Great job !	 
yeah have test all week ! you have class tomorrow or you get a break ?	 
Do we got school tomorrow	 
i wanna head out tonight . but da crew on freeze	 
My parents are getting a new car today . So excited to see it !	 
Zzz 's for me . Time to enjoy a real bed . Night night , Sleep tight . More stories in the morrow .	 
oh yea , bt we had fun today it wasn't that bad . | its not hard ?	 
A peek at Aviary cocktails during our practice run last night . 
all in aid of my final night on the Marlboro Lights and the wine delights you see , no more of that from tomorrow onwards . 
He walks at night	 
hang on , but didn't you order yours yesterday ?	 
I'll give you some to try when we run in a few weeks . Did you want to come up Fri night ?	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
There aren't very many things more spectacular than cars at night . 
he needs to find me tonight pls . Kthnxbai	 
on the sun . ---- the suns on 
Over here doing these chem h/w problems ! smh I have a quiz tomorrow smh	 
I need food , a wee , and more coffee . C'mon Louise , you can do this ! 
This night turning shitty	 
what they got going on tonight	 
Nancy 's walking the 8th precinct tonight . Hope you'll get a chance to meet her .	 
Tostadas for dinner tonight . sad i cant make it to birthday dinner ! Happy Birthday girl !	 
well keep me updated . We having a girls night tomorrow . Me and Tiana wish u could be there !	 
Great  i will be in tomorrow	 
Hells yes ! Got my tix in the mail tonite ! 
I buy chateau ones . For I always lose or break expensive ones ! Same as sun glasses	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Paid bill tuesday , phones not connected by Friday , ring and inform them my mum has cancer , and needs  
^^ Morning Fans Dream high~ have a nice day~	 
No i havent heard where can i listen at Heard my shit ? You may like it . But they got some nice artists in the area	 
well forget you then punk ! nah but good night !	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Latest buzz for shows - Playing at Connie 's RIc Rac on 29 Jan - come along and see the show !	 
. The tickets have arrived . See you on the 19th )	 
I made a healthier choice tonight food wise . I am traditional down south cook . So my down home cooking gets me in trouble I cook with love .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Was asked to pick between water or coke for my meal today . Hmm of course coke !	 
I couldn't sleep . It 's not because of coffee ; it 's because of insomnia . I was up all night thinking about coffee .	 
Fisher 's jabs at Jack Del Rio included mocking the chopping wood incident , and then the time out issue after the Monday night game this year	 
Tonight I'm watching it 's going to be a good night 	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming o . 
I hope tomorrow works out . :]	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming o . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming o . 
Great article , must read for those protesting on Sat - avoid kettle by forming many small ' swar .	 
" Responding to my baby 's cries shows unconditional love , and that is more important than a full night 's sleep ."	 
What a boring ass Thursday . -_-	 
just call me mumbles tonight 
Our collective minds in that band room just keep on giving ! BRAND NEW SONG that will be played at the masque on Feb 11th .	 
i enjoy going out , drinking , having money , NOT breastfeeding , sleeping , and not being woken up in the middle of the night !	 
Nom nom nom thanks chick :D so is the next castle ep on monday/tuesday ?	 
I'm ok . Getting ready for tonight . How are you ?	 
Tested today while sledding , the fleece lined tights/leggings are waterproof ! A bonus since this mom was highly unprepared for sledding !	 
Today was a good day 	 
Wichita Join us tomorrow or Sat . at the 3rd Annual Regional Energy and Sustainability Fair at WSU . 
Today they said there wood be school at regular time . 	 
We don't sleep when the sun goes down . We don't waste no precious time . All my friends in the loop , making up for teenage crime .	 
I will stay at Italy for more some days . May till january 30 or 31 . So now I will go to Russia at February 1 	 
lol I'm queen of tht now yu wanna do another one tonite	 
Come on guys , pls help get some blobs on his map on his schs new blogsite ! Kids will be thrilled tomorr .	 
good luck talking east stadium expansion at BOR meeting tomorrow , we're excited to see what it will look like	 
Actually I drove past THERE today . 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
Perhaps the fact that Suarez would miss pre-season due to Copa Am . is a factor in desire to sign in Jan .?	 
i didnt know you were a Phil Collins fan I can feel it coming in the air tonight . 
Call me tonight ?  Still time to join my FREE call on how to get MORE done in LESS time , with grace and ease at 
Thousands of Egyptians are expected to protest today 
Please help find a communication device desperately needed by a disabled man - last seen 200 blk E . King Ed Jan 23 h .	 
The 3rd strange thing I found in a BGSU bathroom this week ? A bottle of Vicks Dayquil !	 
Ok . Suggestions . What 's good to eat late at night that 's not gonna be bad for you and pile on the weight ?	 
u see ' s tweet today ?	 
R Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday .	 
Goo luck tonight coach ! 
i am not doing anything productive until after tonight 's new episode of The Vampire Diaries . gimme some Damon Salvatore 3 
Not enough time until may 31st . 
Now following form the Thursday hop 
heard you were in the studio today  = yep	 
I gotta iron my night clothes !	 
Follow  2 win on Superbowl Sunday 
show got pushed back to the 4th , won't be a new ep tomorrow night	 
Listening to PLEDGE in repeat mode . Feeling friday fever .	 
something along the lines of " he walks the night "? AWESOME .	 
Ran 8.09 miles in 1 hour and 30 sec . Little breezy tonight . Planned to do 7:45 then speed up to 7:30 ish the 2nd half . 
Did you see today ? She looked so amazing today ! lol ;p	 
YahooNews- Egypt 's protesters gear up for big Friday rallies  AP - Egypt 's grass-roots . 
Then Nikki and Deacon . all sorts of gross the last two minutes of the show yesterday , lol !	 
Awesome deal for Vista Print users today . The Best Daily Deals in Atlanta $10 for $50 of Office Supplies via 
I have to go on a little break . I may be back in time for the SB . Sometimes life don't always work . Hope to see you all when I return RT	 
ESPN anchor going killed me this morning . As fun as Blake highlights , with attainability .	 
I'll be at all of 's show 's in March . From San Diego to Seattle  Not playing , but i'll be at each one !	 
And this . As a know when to stop , as you may offer more advice than is customarily needed or wanted for that matter .	 
She 's gonna come see me tomorrow	 
i have a test in literally every freaking class tomorrow .	 
your hair looks so good ! knowing you cut all yours off makes me less nervous about cutting mine tonight . ( :	 
Filibuster lives Senate rejects changes in rules  AP - The filibuster lives on . The Senate voted overwhelmingly late Thurs .	 
drinking wine and listening to on vinyl with Spencer . already loving this night .	 
lmao and its the first link and he talked about cheating for 25 min in class today . wilfred being a hypocritical	 
33 minutes until the community day participants can release what they saw today . I can't wait ! 
What 's the countdown on Saturday with Bob this week ?	 
I need to do something tonite .	 
We are going to get in tonight with BKS live on www.theleaguedjs.com , www.stickam.com/theleaguedjs 9pm ET BE THERE !	 
TONIGHT The award winning film , Tie-Died , will be showing at 8 PM EST with live commentary by producer , Peter Shapiro .	 
$44* per night . sounds like a dream come true ! Check out the 99 hour sale ! 
and thanks for mentioning the late hour the show is on . some of us have to be up in the morning and 12.30 finnish does not suit .	 
Egypt 's protesters gear up for big Friday rallies  AP - Egypt 's grass-roots protest movement got a double boost Thursday th .	 
Joining tonight 8 PM on Freedom Watch . We will be talking about my op-ed in today WSJ . . .	 
See the cracks in my skin . Feel the ground on my feet now go . I know one girl that 's not gonna get home tonight .	 
im tryin to got a last minute rehearsal for a session sat so gotta see hw tht plays out	 
My tweet count has been about 4000 down since the start of December . Where do I report this , as no-one seems to be fixing it ?	 
Te mande un text yesterday ! 
excited to since lil vince tonight ! Here 's hoping there is wine in a can again !	 
today we have learned you cannot please everyone . we shall see if your committment continue as we fight not to lose 34 pr .	 
Can it be tomorrow night already ?!?!	 
I am at play practice until 6 tonight . But when I get home , I'll send u the set list 	 
gonna be a long night . have to prepare stuff for work tomorrow . or , i might go to sleep and start early in the morning . not sure yet .	 
" limited " means how many ? As every deal today has returned " invalid promo code " less than 10-mins later . Just curious .	 
Haha ! I like it ! Who will be the 1st to tweet rocking the new gear ? ? ? ? 
Photo Really true . I actually have a great article printed in the Bookman in May of 1892 where Doyle is . 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
The female may not be with you very much , but her affections are steadfast and you are always on her mind .	 
Nay , I think it possibly may encourage them .	 
lol best get a rubber case then if you tend to drop them so it bounces next time ! Dropped mine a couple of times too . Night xx	 
Did you see yesterday 's post featuring -friendly letterpress stationary  from ? 
i feel like its saturday o_O	 
Who 's getting ready for Jersey shore night pump time*	 
I kind of want to die and be dead until 2 pm tomorrow .	 
I'm home , thank goodness . Now I'm enjoying a few cold ones especially since I have to go back to work tomorrow . Blahhhhhh	 
Shopping is like therapy and I had a really intense session today . Few new shirts some jeans and a bad pair of stilettos my 
A safe driver course is a good idea for seniors . and everyone else ! It may even reduce auto insurance rates . offers some in AR	 
Morning Rescue is more dramatic then it really needs to be lol	 
Played 2 times today 
woohoo ! I have to make up for tonight 's sobreity	 
bloody hell scott lot of love on here tonight not , whats up with everyone	 
Is it Saturday yet  . lol	 
but the Housewives are my life ! 	 
ooooo my friend showed me a cute guy today :D	 
Sometimes I wonder if I've got the brain cancer . It would explain today . so many other things .	 
to my boy stay comin through in da clutch tho ! We goin in super hard tonight !	 
no school again tomorrow ( :	 
It 's tonight . AND I am home ! This is almost like a solar eclipse stat . 
cant wait to watch beyond scared straight tonight !	 
first we might get a few more inches friday night , that will add up to the january breaking record of snow	 
I'm may not be the best , but I'm not like the rest . 
First time subbing in 2011 at this Sunday , Jan . 30th , 1:30 -3pm ! Brand new mvmnt to challenge ur brain .	 
Man . I had a dream a few months ago that still haunts me till today . I was married , had a kid , doing music , and politics and was happy .	 
A peek at Aviary cocktails during our practice run last night . 
DD is hilarious . If you really like it , you might dig White Wedding . It just released on DVD today .	 
the new album is expected in June  . 
I'm still trying to get in free it may be a failed plan bit yea in the hunt	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Really loving Ruby SVN Bindings today . Figured out some cool stuff .	 
guess who I seen yesterday girl ?	 
Egyptian Interior Ministry warns it will take " decisive measures " tomorrow . Serious violence gu .	 
Tomorrow evening . Yes . Yes . And yes . Unless forgets how to climb down after he climbs up . Are you veggie now ?	 
si el 11 de feb	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Going on a mountain bike tomorrow around 11:30 . Any takers ? 
Surveying the city from the 12th century Venetian fortress of Kerkyra Greece -- 
Now cry til you drown ya face . and bitch i give dam how harsh this may . seem	 
only jet lee walks the night .	 
BOJ Dec Minutes Must Watch Long-Term Rates Moves , Impact TOKYO  - Many Bank of Japan board members voiced . 
AI was traded in December of that season and votes were transferred over to West . Melo named to West starters and can get traded .	 
Borderline Make a photograph that features a very distinct curved line or surface today . 
what was that calendar app you showed me the other night ?	 
I think I may do a blog on that concept -- Being better than Disney than Disney to a point that you become Disney .	 
yes come over im abt to wash and do hw and watch j shore im in the lounge on the 3rd floor	 
Can't wait for the reunion tonite	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
I'm cold , I look like a mess , I have to do the dishes , and I have to clean my room . Oh , what a night !	 
Woo ! Loved that they played Marc Broussard during the intro package last night and some Keane as well ! 
This Sunday catch me at Icons in Columbia for Celebrity Sundays . Yall can hit up  :/ .	 
Why does most of the schools look haunted at night ?	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:19 33 PM	 
Eye test in the morning . Betting a tenner against myself that my eyes have got worse . 
lasting longer the better la . Just like u and I lasting for a decades plus . Our 2nd decade coming soon lol	 
And from the sound of that last [ slightly mental ] tweet I need some sleep . Night all !	 
My feelings got hurt today ! That hasn't happened for a long while . Lemme tell ya , it ranks pretty low on the feelings I wanna have scale 	 
heyy morning ka p'faye	 
well i'm glad you're all sorted !  im off to sleep now - hope you get some sleep  see you tomorrow ! I love you !  3	 
Chicken with Mac n cheese I think will suit tonite .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
guess I shod be thanking you . I planned on watching tvd tonight but it'll be Idol instead my spn , dvds tomorrow . Rock on Idol !	 
My 1st solo album " People Hear What They See " will be available on later this year . Are you as excited as .	 
Skip school for today . Fever 
love you wife ! You free tomorrow ? -	 
i kinda just found out saturday will not be as fun for me as i had hoped . T-T soSad	 
Cool . I'll drop you a link tomorrow ! Thanks in advance for your time . Rob	 
We strapped a camera to Mike Vick 's helmet in yesterday 's NFC Pro Bowl practice . Check out this amazing footage . .	 
winter wipeout comes out today cant wait to laugh til i cant laugh no more	 
Still have a bit if what I'm hoping is implantation bleeding today . That 's day 3 .	 
Aye I got my placement test n April for nursing school :D	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Freak in the Mornin Freak in the Evening	 
Wayy to much to watch tonight . VD , the shore , celts game , nicki q&a . im never going to sleep 
- you don't what 's coming to you . get ready to get loud tonight ! 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at . January 27 , 2011 , 5:27 pm	 
oh she was wearing red shoes on Lopez Tonight =]	 
i've been to school for 1 and a half days this week and supposedly a half day tomorrow , i could get used to this 
tomorrow it 's supposed to be above 70	 
so I got my hair cut today . It 's different . I am not sure I like it . 	 
watched ' i used to be fat ' last night . pretty motivating . time to workout !	 
first month of january ? that is technically what the first month is . . ? jk jk , hope you're ok	 
yep told u yesterday do u remember ?	 
the simple answer is no ! Right now I'm watching the thunder game , analysing for Saturday ! So very tired !	 
2 hr early release yesterday plus 2 hr delay this morn.that 's half a day right there !	 
It 's sibling dinner night !  Woo !	 
by drops in Feb ! 
Since isn't new , I can watch instead of recording it.I'll help Fox get better ratings tomorrow night ! 
Tell him he was a great Buffalo Sabre ! He was the 1st Sabre I ever met back in 1995	 
fri all the cool kids coming	 
Watching the good night show with my munchkin 
Having the flu is not fun 
I'm going today  to protest infront of the Egyptian embassy in Beirut . We should all go , both Lebanese and Egyptians . 
If tonight is my last I wanna spend it with YOU .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
hate to be a stickler , but your " just barely " tweet just missed the cutoff . that means no tweets for 24th and 25th . back to even 	 
-- Thursday Come get Appy in our new and improved bar from 5-7pm with 1/2 priced appetizers ! ( some . 
' He notice the gun , and his rage grew inside . He said , " I'll avenge my lover tonight !' He Is We Kiss It All Better	 
Oh dear . Sat in a Bedouin tent in the middle of a London building . That can only be the precursor to darkness . Oh well , stay listening .	 
morning ! i'm gonna go to the airport for my friend coming from korea .	 
Couple games tonight that im going to enjoy . Miami Knicks . Celtics Portland . Should be a shoot out .	 
off to bed night twitter ;p	 
I have been out of the groove this past couple weeks . Need to get back into coming in the morning . 
Home sales Signed contracts up 2 percent in December 
" Don't Hold Your Breath " final version by premiere this Sunday on BBC'S Radio 1 . Can't wait !	 
Stressed out nd annoyed I'm not lookin forward to school tomorrow   	 
- okay , just got to the set . ; tonight we are going to film until about 1.30 . ; we are going to try to get all the night scenes in .	 
Police took seriously much less bad stuff when I've rung them . Even if it 's a slim chance , they may catch them .	 
I don't As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time f .	 
A kiss on the hand may be quite continental ; But Diamonds are a girl 's best friend .	 
There 's too much good TV on tonight .	 
Good morning ! Lets put a smile on that face :D	 
tomorrow is the big day  i been waitin for it all week	 
you are creating all the bubbles at night im chasing round tryna pop them all the time we dont need to trust a single word they saaay	 
Only One Chivas Player On Chepo 's List Chepo de la Torre made his first national team list public today and o . 
yesterday till mon i need to wear that weird dress to work . very bu hao yi si . so weird	 
I am completely exhausted . That'll teach me to hang out with Charlie Sheen on a Wednesday night .	 
aha good dat today	 
hey do we have dress down tomorrow ?	 
haha no worries , this weekend for sure . I'm off friday , saturday and sunday each week	 
Forget all that , is your daughter 18 yet ? lmao Tier Two game on Rogers TV tonight	 
I wish the news would just say " PG County Closed Tomorrow ." :D	 
i got go out feb . 20th for my twins bday .	 
I get to interview people for a job tomorrow . HR picked them out from resumes . I just want them to be competent .	 
The Big Pink - Dominoes  Crystal Castles 4th Take 5 choice is another pal of theirs !	 
The new levy is designed to help those worst affected by floods , but those people may have to fork out as well . 
Eep ! No , think I may not have communicated well . I'll send you a message . 	 
Elijah came into work today requesting an interview , but we turned him away cause we're a Not- . 
i'm inviting you to my house for dinner next wed . night . and none of this i have to work crap	 
FACT The regime in shut down the Internet in an attempt to silence the voices of the 1 million people protesting .	 
Someone should call me tonight .!	 
going to intramural basketball game tonight for support . GOOD LUCK !	 
This is what I was talkng about  Good morning !  " You came near when I called You , and You said ' Do not Fear'."	 
Wonder if works today	 
I'll be . No choice . I'll never accept this half-way to see . It was all ok til last June .	 
I know you do babe . I am sorry I won't ruin this night I promise	 
And today is such a horrible day !	 
you give him one more chance ; just like the time before but he already knows youd give a 100 more . until tht night in bed	 
I hope today is better , with or without 3 cups of coffee . At least it 's Friday . you're getting closer to your weekend !	 
I checked in at Village East Cinema  on 
Best friend said we gon be hella froze tomorrow . Lol .	 
Guess I'm in the house tonight -__-	 
That character been kinda Quiet today	 
o i'm going to get a pc mic tonight how much r they	 
Thinking about leaving my internship early , I'm to emotional to be here right now and i'll fight a kid today .	 
Join us tonight for The Affair ! We'll have and spinning for the . 
Who 's watching Jersey Shore tonight ?	 
Hopefully you guys can make our Casino Party on March 5 . let me know if you didn't get the email invitation .	 
The Jose Cuervo Silver LADIES will be in the house with FREE samples . As always $4 drinks ALL NIGHT and $100 . 
Don 's Past Picks ZMT . TO up over 50% since February of last year 
I'm tweeting on behalf of my sister from the states ! 2 people seen pouring gasoline on cars in downtown cairo today w/p .	 
Birthday = Anniversary ! Mariah calls her Birthday her anniversary of her 12th birthday . 	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
So tomorrow , ill go to the mall again and ill buy that na . hehe =]	 
quoting my dear friend Anne , " Awesome is synonymous to prom !" Loved the night , wish it lasted a little bit longer !	 
got to hang out one day since you wanted me to come yesterday	 
Have fun tonight ; actually a bit nostalgic for a gym filled with 300 screaming kids . 
RedOne didn't even produce her 1st single ? What a slap in the face ! Fernando Garibay sucks ! He ain't half as good !	 
Close call tonight ! A skier interrupted Diane Sawyer on from Central Park ! VIDEO 
Friday Feb 4th be sure to come to Aven's. We will have some of the BEST Ain the area in our corner window . 
My favorite day on Twitter . Thong Thursday Lol 
I never said " thank you " to everyone who came out to the Roxy last friday . Please forgive me . Thank you so so so . 
how to meet women . go to the bookstore . Hey what book is that ? cool lets hangout night . sex already woahh	 
thanks for dropping by , we hope you had a fun night 
Oh , I get my blood drawn next Friday . Yay .	 
I'm cooking for you tonight .	 
What to do about this saturday . I could use the money but would like to take my honey out	 
TODAY , I shall be patient with them . I shall not snap . I shall be nice and not irritable . breathe if i must .	 
haha uncle lance remember , the father of carter and Clark the boys who stayed over the night I left ? Ring any bells ?	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Thanks to everyone who came down to and those who tuned in online tonight ! Was fun ! Back with The Gentleman at Elgin 10 Feb	 
Yao selected to the All Star game . 8th time as a starter , 5th time not deserving of it . 
Friday Feb 4th be sure to come to Aven's. We will have some of the BEST Ain the area in our corner window . 
" fuck yea gonna go home , put my shit in my new shelf thing , then draw like a mother fucker ". I finished the 1st one just now.I'm tired .	 
make the cd and bring it to church Sunday	 
Fun skiing today . Tonight is early show , dinner , midnight show at the Egyptian . I need some coffee ! 
I am starving need to make dinner . it 's crunchy taco night !	 
Friday Feb 4th be sure to come to Aven's. We will have some of the BEST Ain the area in our corner window . 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
They want power . We want freedom . They have guns . We have cellphones . They're ready 2 kill . We're willing 2 die 4 bet .	 
it 's scary to see how few , , and tweets there are today . Electronic voices quieted in mass ; echoes suddenly silent .	 
I have family coming in from Germany tomorrow . I wish was with them . /3 in real life ?!	 
Looking for a unique and delicious snack for Superbowl Sunday ? Try Laura 's Best Recipes Kale Chips . I will be ! 
That early stage angle investment I mean in LinkedIn sure is paying off today ! 
Free champagne for the ladies tonight dance to rick rude spinning for Bas . 
haha that 's the shit , I'm going on Saturday for hed pe , manning bar is sick	 
Great having Matt home for dinner . actually home at by 5:30 . I so needed backup with the boys today .	 
Yeah sure . If I'm on . If not it I should be on for sure in the morning b/c I don't have nothing to do in the morning .	 
Getting ready for a big trip tomorrow . Excited and nervous ! Just can't wait to get there .	 
Catch dj Horus every monday 4-6pm gmt .	 
no sorry , i might come tomorrow though	 
Jeff Fisher is out at Tennessee 's head coach . Tennessee may be out as my favorite team . Terrible , terrible day .	 
Hello Friends-Could you and help me get some Followers ? I got 12 followers today and I'm trying for more .	 
haha so u guys r sisters ! u guys on NML today were awesome and so color coordinated ! follow ?!?	 
I know many people I follow will be at this weekend , but it 's kind of the worst possible weekend for me . stop by Saturday .	 
Close call tonight ! A skier interrupted Diane Sawyer on from Central Park ! VIDEO 
we're coming to maui at the end of march with the family . taping some stuff for our wgn radio show . love to arrange	 
So today is my birthday ! 
Cop forgives attacker Eric German was sentenced to six years in prison Thursday for attacking Middletown police . 
Warning the Internet may contain traces of nuts . ~Author Unknown	 
Home  Eating churros , today was a pretty chill day	 
" Never do today that which will become someone else 's responsibility tomorrow ." - David Brent	 
that tonight i'm fucking you	 
Good point . it 's also the 15th anniversary of this too .	 
SENIORS ! I almost forgot to remind you Common Scholarship Application due to counselors by tomorrow ! Write those applications !	 
=p I plead the 5th	 
I still cannot decide what to do tonight 	 
wowa , got a bit carried away with that film . um , it 's late ! so night night all X	 
Omg moment 4 life video comes out today on mtv . ---- groupie .	 
Has anybody noticed that I leave a trail of tweets when I first get on everyday , then I stop almost entirely for the rest of the night ?	 
And another band that placed in our top 10 for , at the Big Day Out yesterday ! 
NO HOMEWORK , that means that i have time to do my nails watch last night 's ep . of american idol ;D	 
Yes , better tonight . Sill need actual manifestos/policy comparisons and debates though .	 
Okay , so now that the biggest setback is over , I'm stepping away from screens for the rest of the night 	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
Planning a trunk show for Saturday , February 12th . Details posted soon ! In the meantime , invite your friends to . 
Its friday . come on . i nd all d energy i can get .	 
. I had two today . Must have been something in the tax water today !	 
you clubbing ? Nah I ain't making that move . What you doing tonight party n commonz	 
i need to get my mind off what may happen to me . out tonight !	 
Had my picture taken today for SI 's Golf Plus Mag coming out on equipment for the 2011 season , wearing Nat Nast and Ashworth . Nice !	 
' Life in a Day'Tonight , attend the Sundance premiere from the comfort of your home via 
Watching my Dad play Call of Duty Black Opps may be the highlight of the holiday season .	 
I just couldn't write more . Disappointed in my self . Good night	 
i don't think i'm gonna be able to make it tonight but i know you all are going to have fun !	 
She 's even on his mind , while he 's asleep at night . Cause that 's that the feeling you've given me .	 
r u the dime every monday ?	 
omg I wish but I gotta save em for my exam on tuesday 	 
I'm happy today had an interview and got hired it you have to be quick at it but at least its something finally . 
So who wants to come over Saturday and sand some drywall ?	 
Obama 's New Press Secretary Announced Jay Carney It was announced today that former Time magazine repo . taw 
i love my best friend for coming over when she knew i was depressed yesterday , and she brings chips and chocolate :D love ya 
not cool . i had a gatorade today . lol i went to subway and they don't sell monsters -_-	 
Warm regard Friday to special couple be happy and keep smile to the world ;-)	 
R.I.P . I didn't know you , but I'm sure you were a lovely person . may you rest in perfect peace .	 
man . today was a disaster !	 
let 's seee study during the week , chill , class , study during the day on the weekends and party at night . It 's working so far 	 
Overwhelmed ! Got choir rehearsal tonight AND plenty test to study for ! 
got to warn U tho , 30+ HWT category is tough to score high in . has posted some amz times and is " only " 20th right now	 
Rumor BlackBerry Messenger 6 will get into gaming RIM may be gearing up to officially announce BlackBerry M . 
Weight gain from taking contraceptive pills a myth ?In fact , heavier individuals who keep their diet stable may . 
Father , Son Homeless After House Fire An early morning fire leaves one man in the hospital with se . .	 
kyle your are gorg and hilar ! cant wait to watch tonight ! wish you a lifetime of happiness and well , maybe just a little drama	 
Weight gain from taking contraceptive pills a myth ?In fact , heavier individuals who keep their diet stable may . 
Got plans tonight ? A handful of tickets were released for the The Blow  
Audio I heard a homeless man sing this today on the 4 train . I liked it . 
i saw bees yesterday . there shouldn't be bees out in january , right ?	 
that 's exactly what I did in Parliament today 
Why is Rihanna so fucking hot ? Lyrics like these - " Sticks and stones may break my bones , but chains and whips excite me ."	 
its the winter spectator sport yo ! C'mon, you know the modern america has no clue what common courtesy is . _ 
Tuesday Video About the Storm 
haha me too but I was so tired today	 
Hey ! A blog update ! Sick of being Sick  
totally forgot to put my parking permit up today for 7 hours . luckily there was no ticket when I went back to my car :D	 
Girls r startin 2 look alike to me . Ive counted several girls today We all have the same weaves , leggings w/ boots , dressed n all black .	 
bout to sip on 40 's for the night . 
Before u start to judge me , remember this , U don't know me , U don't know what I've been through . U have no idea what .	 
Adele in the morning is like , heaven .	 
January is Stalker Awareness Month . Are you aware of your stalker ?	 
going on a date with myself tonight , then 
Ive always wanted to slam da door on a Jehovahs witness like Ice Cube did on " Friday "	 
I talked Reds prospects with earlier today . You can read it all here - 
LA pals - meet Malachai and Ethan of fame tonight at Meltdown Comics ! 
' s feature on our Sunday Suppers here in North Alabama . why not start one with your friends ? .	 
I thought today would be different but a person like me is used to this by now . nothing personal	 
Have seen tonight 's episode of  four times now and still can't stop laughing . Amazing .	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
I reached a 100 readers today ! How peachy . Can someone say giveaway this weekend ?	 
Spending the evening my lil bros battle of the band concert ! Yea for Scream at the Sky !	 
Heard DSU Jimmy Allen suppose to be on American idol tonite and heard he made the cut word that 's .	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Snow Day Due to the inclement weather , all School District of Philadelphia Schools will be closed Friday , January 28th .	 
bummer  , this is a short visit , I'm leaving tomorrow , would love to meet sometime hang , I've seen you on ruby lists lately 	 
No way ! Really ? That 's so weird . I guess you'll get it tomorrow .	 
If you were curious , here 's what i look like as the king of Weinter-een-mas . More items for tomorrow .	 
I miss my little chink . Haven't seen her for like a month ! ) 50 months tomorrow 3	 
Yes everyone , this is my real account . I got hassled on espn last night for not having one . Jimmer Fredette is here  .	 
Debit card fees headed lower for merchants , may cost consumers more 
Quick easy tonight spaghetti lol	 
Lessons learned today non-friends can message you , how to use the block button , and how to eliminate anonymous blog comments . I'm bleeding	 
" It was a season of firsts . And that night I rack up a . personal first "	 
It 's tomorrow . How you say broke in Spanish ? Me no hablo- Kanye	 
Who 's coming to the tour in March ?	 
Have just prepared some sugar cookie dough ready for baking tomorrow !	 
today i felt differen't like i needed to BETTER MYSELF but where do i start is the question because no one is PERFECT 	 
We are horrified and saddened by the murder of prominent activist in yesterday afternoon .	 
Ross Guess what happened at work today ? Chandler A dinosaur died a million years ago ? Ross Uh , try 65 million years ago , then try shhh !	 
at night when the stars light up my room , i sit there alone . talking the moon .	 
On my way to this tournament . Should be a fun night .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Can't wait to finish my last two finals tomorrow and hang out with friends after . And then come home to catch up on TV shows .	 
Tomorrow is Data Privacy Day 
I come alive in the night time	 
Screw cais-ers for not having school today 	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they a .	 
tke me out . where we going tonight	 
love seeing people who used to be so scene rockin the hipster look , wonder what they'll change to next . It 's like fuckin .	 
lol , people asking about the 1st line . " It doesn't matter if you love him [ a man] , or capital H-I-M [ God ] " .	 
Catching up on American Idol . Jersey Shore later tonight ! T-Shirt time ?	 
probably heading out to Natchitoches tomorrow .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Today I was walking right next to my crush ( hehe	 
very exciting , though you're making me jealous ! We had a meeting about our Venice trip in 3rd year tonight ! Wish it were sooner !	 
My left shoulder blade hurts REALLY bad . I should stop drawing for tonight x w x	 
i have to work today . but really , i just want to hire out movies . 
" manditory " morning swim practice tomorrow 
But he was tweeting like nothing yesterday . Life is short .	 
Not enough hours in the day , I'm now starting to borrow them from tomorrow ! . Not a good idea !	 
Thanks see u Saturday :D	 
I am listening to the " Porn Sunday " segment for the 3rd time today . It may be the funniest segment in radio history	 
tomorrow !  maybe if she'd answer my texts hah	 
4th guitar lesson  loves it .	 
yea ! It could be that bad ! Night , 
I really should go to sleep or I'll regret it in the morning . just got bad news a friend is really sick and can't come along s	 
Apparently there 's a concert here tonight since I had to park 80 miles away .  
yay gym night !	 
Tonight im loving you . i swear that song comes on at the wrong times ! Lol	 
were you at the rehearsal today after school ?	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Wearing my shirt , buying My Pink Friday app , it set on MTV for the video ! Pumped ! Best day ! (( :	 
Loved this morning this morning with gino cooking naked although my predictive says gino should be Gimp ! Lol	 
Hmm . I really dont wanna go to school tomorrow . But at least its friday 3	 
Payday Cash today Eliminate All Hurdles for Quick Cash 
:I am in The Age  Mag today ! In case you care ! Xxx	 
Lakers Practice Report 1/27/11 The Lakers , in defeating the Utah Jazz by 29 points on Tuesday , did a good job . 
We'll be playing at Raleigh 's Deep South Bar February 4th . Come get it off your chest with us .	 
My birthday is in less than a month . Its not even gone b nuthin to do cuz its the Saturday afta cotton club . ima jus go on a date or sumn	 
Happy Friday ! Driving under beautiful sky down Sotobori-dori with heavy traffic worried about parking space .	 
why 90% of people today CAN'T Read this sentence with out making a MISTAKE !	 
I want to Spend the Night - Bill Withers	 
Lots of good comments today on yesterday 's post about butch style . Special thanks to ! 
waiting for 28th of February , Paramore is coming to Lima - Peru 	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two hours until 5 pm on Friday	 
ITS 2011 and we fuckin these hoes is by far the funniest shit i heard today	 
Get your FREE today ! via computer or direct from your cell - !	 
hey my friend ; what should we do today ? 
Country is my rock ! Ready for tomorrow night .	 
This has been a crazy week . Sunday and Monday were great . The rest of the week has been torture . One one thing could make me feel better .	 
Gold Room tonight , Mood Lounge with tomorrow night . 
No school tomorrow , stamp .	 
Working on the Brazil trip and getting excited about what God 's going to do with us ! Also talked with Frank tonight , what a man of GOD !	 
Show tonight at 10PM US PST ! Tune in for some great stuff .  
I just love when morning gets here , cuz i can send a Great Big Good Morning sms to my dearest . wht a lovely way to start a day	 
Utah Jazz Silver Lining In Loss To Spurs During the Lakers game on Tuesday night , the Jazz looked like a team . 
Pizza dough ready for my little girls bday party tomorrow 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at . January 27 , 2011 , 5:27 pm	 
I was not at ALA but I'll be at TLA being held in Austin in April .	 
so i guess there 's no school for pgcps tomorrow .	 
just made me a 2nd twitter	 
Now this dude is getting his mother 's 18th century pornographic book collection appraised . wtf ?	 
niggas only hit yu up at night	 
I need there to be some hockey tonight .	 
Missed the gym today but i made up for it in the room	 
im about to start packing tonight .	 
Feeling like wine tonite n my laid back bag no Ciroc or pinnacle tonite	 
Why did I think Supernatural would be on Thursdays and thus on tonight ? It isn't, and now I'm just disappointed and sad . Tomorrow , then !	 
I have to get out tonight . I feel like I'm suffering from asphyxiation in this apartment . Luckily for me , I will be escaping ! 8 )	 
jersey shore tonight , hope my plebe doesn't mind sharing me with the tv for the night .	 
i'm not about to break down , not today . 33	 
Jersey Shore tonight !	 
Getting ready to talk to the guys on 4th Toller ! 
Come out and ride pala on Feb 9th to celebrate Lusk 's legacy ! 
lights are starting to flicker , for no school tomorrow !	 
- we're going in May for my kid 's birthday . first time for him and Carrie 
Good news also today world loses David Kato courageous activist- 
Babysitting sucks , especially when my sister threatens to not come home from school tomorrow .	 
I'm going to get all her info for you tomorrow or Saturday , just remind me brother	 
Let 's start tracking the first of many lasts today . Last 8.30 am train ride 
Jim Wallis Values at Davos Yesterday was the first day of the World Economic Forum in Davos , a little mountain . 
Afternoon Fix President Obama to name Jay Carney as White House press secretary ; Illinois Supreme Court rules . 
Despite being sick I am excited about seeing tomorrow for his birthday !	 
going to see Black Swan tonight at the cinema in Havelock North after a tough week - looking forward to it ! Any thoughts on it ?	 
I pretty much figure things out I'm brighter than the sun I understand and comprehend a lot of things without being spoken 
Oh TapeWorm . wt u ate today ?	 
Japan - Real yakuza bust ? Expansion of anti-gang legislation may give unwanted results 
Egypt gets its Tiananmen square moment . Man bravely stands in front of armored vehicle ! Must watch ! .	 
Just got to for the vs game . Who 's winning tonight ? 
lmao I try it 's a struggle I overslept today lol and Tuesday just didn't feel like going lol but I'll start going nxt week lol	 
so since we didn't need our literature book today me decide to leave our book in the bushes xD .	 
if you go up to Yonge and Elm , The Queen and Beaver does Sunday roast dinners-thanks ! great Idea !	 
If you missed Rebbie on The View today She did a wonderful job . Very proud of .	 
Re NEW BUILD PLANS Nem showed up today , Thanks Hoss . Not sure there were enough peanuts in that box , next time . 
C'mon guys ! We need more followers ! We're new to Twitter and we're also new to ghost hunting but very eager to learn ! Follow us now ! :D	 
Third one today . i need to stop . 
Come May it is on ! Can't wait to see you again bro ! Take care !	 
fear factory tonight :D	 
that feeling of love i was feeling yesterday is back . i guess its not temporary anymore	 
go to get chest xray and another EKG tomorrow . dam .	 
dropping all new material tomorrow night in the mean time I'm trying to get up to 500 followers on twitter I'm stuck at 260 now help me out !	 
school is school and I'm graduating in May	 
what time tomorrow morning ?	 
im taking it tomorrow again so I can laminated	 
Sticks and stones may break my bones , but kelso nailed your sister	 
The Daily Show tickets for February 3 , 2011 have sold out !	 
At Hooters Bike Night in Sunrise , FL tonight ! Come down and check it out ! The parking lot is filling fast with bikes !	 
something about " no sun " and " walking the night ." I have no friends , so tix would help my self esteem !	 
No skool for tomorrow Yay !	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
so had the nerve to call me bougie today because I said " I don't walk on grass ." LOL ! Too funny .	 
muy bien y tu ?, you online dear ?, i'm have a final exam today maybe gonna be online on 13:00 PM GMT +7 dear .	 
I saw a Voldermort this early morning and that may be the reason I wanna leave the class . My mind is somewhere FAR ~ FAR ~ AWAY . =D	 
Scrum Axe Saturday on The Farm . 
Why put 5 black bags of rubbish in Broad Str  in the middle of the night ? Use the bins next time ! ?	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
has another snow day tomorrow . wow . i actually wanted to go to school .	 
Getting familiar with Scottish beers tonight . Hello malts . lots of'um.	 
I mailed off some v-day cards today will mail out a couple more saturday if i'm not working	 
yeah . tomorrow in the morning i'll play :D	 
a bit and hangs up , texts I may stay home tonight . Do you want to come over or want me to come back or anything ?	 
No school tomorrow yay	 
did you sleep at the office last night ?	 
for giving me a reason to wake up in the morning .	 
oh dearest fanny , now that you are back amongst us in the inner north , can we please designate a gin-joint in which we may meet ?	 
So glad there is ONE person who agrees with me . LOL It 's crazy out there tonight !	 
Can't wait for the reunion with tonight and then !	 
Sounds so good ! I had hot chocolate for lunch today . Bliss . But with peppermint . Mmmm .	 
K y'all needs our help.she 's a fan so vote for her tomorrow at please and thanks.don't ask just do	 
april 30th right after my birthday sucks !	 
going to the studio tonight to pull it up	 
No school tomorrow =) ))	 
Monster Gives Users Control Over Ads via 
we walk tonight ?	 
Big Bang Theory tonight , a repeat but could watch over and over !	 
I'm finally out of my sleep coma for the sole purpose of eating . Then I'm going right back to bed . Homework tonight ? I'll pass . 3	 
Get your tix to our 7th Annual Superbowl Party ! Talk to any staff member this weekend .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Same wavelength . just saw your tweet to .  been so busy , finally looked at calendar for tomorrow getting excited !	 
Me too ! After seeing them on Monday , Lauren our Online and Entertainment Editor is loving Plan B . 
Heading home from practice . its getting real . first match 2pm on Saturday !	 
The man beside me on the treadmill tonight at gym passed gas like three times ! Phew-wee !	 
Organic gardening calendar for February To freshen indoor carpets , collect and dry rose petals or lavender bloo . 
We own the night	 
We met on some dating thing on da internet i dont remember wat its called and we exchanged numbers on thur	 
Don't forget Tonight 's Knicks-Heat game is on at 8pm . 
remember I was gonna give u $20 a week but u didn't wash my car ! C'mon bitch get to steppin	 
Making moves tomorrow , hit me up !	 
oh but you'll want to join . Someone may be joining us )	 
Kappa party at tcnj on Saturday . Better not be lame !	 
Received my The Grand Social package today - a new style post will on its way very soon ! xo	 
Jang Geun Suk singing early in the morning . i love my alarm tone .	 
Hunger week has just been a joy can not wait to pray with every tomorrow night 6:30 p.m. .	 
Novella Marie is my daughter . she 's almost 2 now . i think when i 1st hung out with you i just had her .	 
Now following from Thursday hop 
We have received dozens and dozens of email questions for , we will try to ask as many as we can on the show t .	 
there 's something different about Principal Figgins today . lol 
It 's like today hates me and is bound and determined to make me cry . So far , I'm dry-eyed , but if one more thing goes wrong .	 
Looking forward to Ford 's earnings report tomorrow . After today run-up , $19 is within reach . Time to take profits ?	 
Am i 2 old 2 have the my Pink Friday app ? 
shit just got home from working amp to be off tomorrow	 
is it like drinking a fine censor* ? But after what you sent me today Comic Sans would be a nice breath of fresh air !	 
Good night people - Be careful ! 
so i guess if you're an editor evaluating a writer , the clips indicate they can get along . not always , though .	 
wants to increase membership value . Members , join our focus group on Feb . 8th and get a couple perks ! 
yes yes ! Today nv sick . Lucky . Lalala . Your cny clothes how already ? I hv to pass you our farewell  
Finally made it home . Over 600 miles . 13 " of snow from last night . Wow . The driveway can wait .	 
I checked in at Lovebirds Cafe  on 
Carnival was dope last night it was good seeing@BgirlShorty and@J2ThaBlaze it 's Bern way to long	 
Is Apple 's iPad invincible ?Despite an army of challengers drawing back their bows , Apple 's iPad may ride out t . 
Home from work early . Only put in 9 hours today =P . Leave me things ? =) 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
i sent you a letter today to let you know how much your friendship means to me don t worry i don t need anything else	 
yes , today we need rest	 
I drive a Chevy Corsica . 1 time I got run off the freeway . Today I was waiting for 3 different trucks to rear-end me . Dicks !	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
Don't forget that our new service schedule starts this weekend at . Saturday 5 p.m. 7:15 p.m. | Sunda .	 
telling them not to worry about making noise , esp at night .	 
Took the cat to the cool vet 's today . Old Victorian , gorgeous place .	 
Last night was incredible ! Love Adelaide long time !	 
Today is turning into a stellar day !	 
I love how you had a moment this morning with it over coffee . rock on ! Good luck tomorrow !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Lakers Practice Report 1/27/11 The Lakers , in defeating the Utah Jazz by 29 points on Tuesday , did a good job . 
slowly but surely uploading the past year of my life . march is up ! 
Win 2 VIP tix to Hangout Fest , just " announcing their lineup on Tuesday " for a chance to win . [ via ]	 
Update Former S . African leader Nelson Mandela , recovering from collapsed lung , could be released from hospital Frida .	 
I feel like I should pay a visit to Concourse E at ATL airport , since I've been to all the other ones today . 
Everyone knows Whole Foods has incredible tasting cheese . Join us for American Artisan Cheese Tasting , Fri . Feb . 
Thank you , , for your votes for reform in the Senate today , even if your caucus leader didn't share your courage .	 
and celebrating my nephew 's 14th b-day	 
night fishing on lake Travis tonight	 
Saturday , no class due to tournament . Wish Team Magic Luck !	 
We may be merely ' amending ' , but to me it 's just one step closer to this 
Please do ! It 's really really fun ! The slab is being poured tonight . Framing/drywall up tomorrow . Lots to see !	 
Boston for the night	 
ah geez it 's still january isn't it ? she 's a bitch too .	 
I watched that yesterday . How shallow r u lyndell ?	 
i miss you send me a picture of tomorrow I'm going to connect on Twitter at 3:00 pm , I will check the twitter tonight and	 
I don't want school tomorrow	 
Good night all ^^	 
I may have just crashed the computer . Uh oh .	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
I'm curious to get your take on the Titans right now . Very puzzled by what happened with them today .	 
about two minutes before you came on today . I swear !	 
Hanging out at my place tonight . Gonna do some schoolwork , maybe watch some movies , etc .	 
Baby 's 1st Tweet Great time last night The Actor 's Network listening to , an amazing woman , then sche .	 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
ah that 's right , i was going to do some flame-staring this night  I'm right on it ! XD	 
. Happy Birthday , sir , and here 's hoping you might tweet a few lines from Thurber tomorrow . (Re .	 
Many violent inmates may get vote	 
Do you still work at the White House ? Are you going to answer the questions you promised you would answer yesterday ? 
will post the legislation on his website tomorrow . It'll have its first Senate hearing Feb . 7	 
Today wasn't a very good day .	 
Paulo is happy to have figured out how to fix some JavaScript on his own today . Thanks 
I don't know if I'm watching it tonight . Probably not . I've seen few matches .	 
I really don't even want to talk to anyone tonight unless they're about to give me at least a $100 pledge .	 
New Task Posted Weekly  dish washing	 
the sun 's burnt out ; and the sky 's a pale shade of grey . 
Yummy Pot Roast today . 
I meant how lol . on 2nd thought hoe works too !	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
yo shoveling is the 2nd most annoying thing in the world behind raking	 
I hope classes are in tomorrow	 
1st Food Fight - oh shit ! SE is the best ! 2nd Food Fight- bitch you just fucked us ALL up !	 
nobody got me were i am today but God Almighty himself	 
she look act like one may as well 
Don't forget -- mummy program on Sat !  .	 
gd morning zash . hv a beautiful day ahead .) 
It 's Thursday so I'm heading to Stoney 's " Rockin ' Rodeo " for cheap drinks , great food , and Nashville 's Curtis Luckey ! Come hang with me .	 
Cup o ' chamomile tea , and I will finish this statement tonight !	 
to wedding day morning*	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
Screens help to create a smaller relaxing area within a larger space . 
so excited to shoot on Saturday . fingers crossed model choices work out .	 
Pope says atheists pick choose their morals . Correct . Today I will be frowning on child abuse not having a prob .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
My POV from tonight 's photography for a Yacht manufacturer . We'll do the same again tomorrow . 
I lost my mum at the shopping centre last night . funniest . thing . ever .	 
Increase your sales and profits by 300% - 400% starting today and never purchase another sales lead again ! . 
^_^ This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on Feb 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Id rather go Saturday	 
January is the worst month for staying motivated .	 
I'm sure there 's a blog-rant in there somewhere , since I can't rant about the today .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Friday morning is the worst time to have a stats class .	 
Yao selected to the All Star game . 8th time as a starter , 5th time not deserving of it . 
6th Street . Got a decent chain from a crackhead once ! Wondering where to buy some sick gold chain biz here in SF	 
PS Fingers crossed I make on that last tweet . Updated last night . Writing ther .	 
Tough day , but now it 's Thursday pizza night ! That makes everything better .	 
I still feel completely sick but I have to go to work tonight after calling out for two days . =(	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Who getting fucked up with me tomorrow ?	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive kind of way .	 
Jersey shore tonight . i think sammi 's gonna leave	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Thanks , it 's like at noon today I went from grim to normal . thank god . that was a doozy .	 
Today was live wid my niggas .	 
On my way now to my album listening party . so excited to see all my Japanese fans tonight !	 
South Sudan referendum underway Recently featured in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 15 look at 
Join us FREE EVERY MONDAY for " Master Marketing Mondays " training at 9pm ET . Check out all the details 
You look " adorkable " in your hat on tonight . Good luck in SF this weekend .	 
Date night with T !  
Group Fitness Tonight , are you coming ? Any requests ?	 
true that ! so we all gunna ditch tomorrow ?	 
2 nice events going here tonight . Bolivia fundraise and the European Chambers networker .  
Extremely excited to have the day off tomorrow and a xc ski adventure in my future 	 
Lay over in Cleveland hopefully not suck here .! I need some Ciroc .! Coco loso night for sure .!	 
miss u 2 girl ! u doin anything tonight friend ?	 
I seen u last night shoulda spoke !	 
I got out of class early tonight , so of course the car battery is dead and I'm stuck . OF COURSE . At least I'm stranded with .	 
What the hell happened there this morning ? :D 
how is morgan tonight ?	 
today was better ?	 
block off your Saturday and put on your PJs ! is having an " All About Aniston " movie marathon !	 
I'm a newbie to sushi , but I love it ! As I'll be out of town tomorrow , we've declared tonight " sushi night "! 	 
Both teams tonight will be playing without a full roster . Heat without Bosh . Knicks without . .	 
News Corp and Apple 's Eddy Cue to Launch ' The Daily ' on February 2nd 
this one that was being watched all evening . Wait a sec .	 
Wow . Zaid is amazing on today . The host appears to be the one being grilled today . The Qs posed r amateurish . 
Fatal Boob Jobs For America Top rated in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 16 look at 
Really good coverage of the sentencing today . Such a sad case .	 
Jake Rob will playing with JW at the 2/25 NC show then the next night in NJ .	 
vinny , come to starkville , mississippi with pauly d in april when he comes to dj 	 
Looks like tomorrow 's protests in Egypt will be largest in nation 's history . 
We are the night / we own the night	 
found out today that there are more black men in prisons than on college campuses . smh 
I miss you too diamond , well see each other sat . !	 
Last Night 's Session . Me wit . Showed He Knows How to Play a lil 
I am berry berry grumpy in the morning esp when I hear bees buzzing in my ears . office bumblebee stop buzzing at 8am .	 
It feels like Sunday .	 
just finished a savory rehearsal with new compositions a new look Numinous group for our March 21st ' Bachianas ' celebration gig	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
We hear that Jersey Shore 's will be in Ames on March 5 . Club Element to be exact .	 
Really dont know what I'm going to wear at this photoshoot tomorrow	 
today is one of those times .	 
After this disappointing game today I'm going for 20 or better tomorrow	 
I haven't had a PB&J sandwich in a long time . I think I have a mission tonite .	 
Thursday nite used to mean dressing up and hitting the clubs . Now it means sitting in my boxers , watching Law And Order and popping rolaids	 
A hour and 30 left in here . wat good tonight ?	 
have a blessed friday everyone 	 
Tonight , its going downn	 
Well if it helps , I'm always hear to help ! Whats for you in April ? I see thats your motivation as well , mine 's for ' Mania .	 
got a call back for a second interview tomorrow !	 
I am beat DOWN . goin to bed early tonight	 
Dominique Morrison , who had 32 against Oakland earlier this month , just scored his first points of the night nearly 10 minutes in .	 
we walk the night ?	 
In today 's Telescope , read about a boy in Norway who fended off a pack of wolves by blasting Megadeth music . 
Watching on channel 4 now ! Can't wait to see them live in Bristol . Shame it 's a Tuesday night . No spangled activities .	 
im off to bed have to get up at 8 for a 3 hour training , night guys	 
Right , so I need to find a copy of that to stream tonight , obviously . 
I like to think of my morning cycle commute as a lower budget version of the running man .	 
pervy thursday ! and the one week anniversary of our bowling league 
Yes ! The new color is being mailed next Mon .	 
6002 good morning . ^^ . are you tired ?. brush teeth and have a good breakfast^^ . work hard . ^^ and relax more^^	 
Playing the warehouse tonight in la crosse , the site of the infamous headlining show !	 
I hate it when I can't tell if a guy is flirting with me or just being nice xD Well then , algebra will be awkward tomorrow .	 
Let 's just . No SPN tomorrow night /3	 
the lonely stoner seems to free his mind at night.he 's all alone . some things will never change .	 
Ricky Gervais is in the opening scene of tonight 's The Office episode !	 
hey my friend ; how do you do today ? 
free movie screening tonight for the new Harold and Kumar jawn . hell yea use me . ALL I know is that Im goin higher than a motherfucker	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Its so . so rainy today	 
" what about a bow tie ?" " no it promises a intelligence you won't deliver " - this makes me think of .	 
I'd be bowling if I didn't already have something planned for tonight . I went to the Town Hall meeting last year .	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
thank you God for helping me to woke up this morning 	 
Good night for whoever gets ! I wassssssssss	 
we hunt tonight ?!	 
No matter what challenges may uphold you , God will answer .	 
wat u doing today	 
lmfao one of em was adorable some 8th graders are hitting on us 
Who is excited about Ricky Gervais on tonight 's all-new episode of ? Don't miss it at 9/8c !	 
Listen to ' s interview with Gillard this morning . Asking the basic questions . 
Your First Move For Friday , Jan . 28 What follows is a roundup of where the " Fast Money " traders think the market could . 
saw a pile of baby breath this morning =w= very very brightened up !	 
today we have learned you cannot please everyone . we shall see if your committment continue as we fight not to lose 34 pr .	 
 Actually , it 's all spread out . It just seems like it 's all at the same time ! Baked beans for dinner tonight !	 
Lol knicks tonite dude trust me wade lil baby got a migrane and gonna be wearing tinted glasses tonite.where 's the toughness	 
ok i am now starting my essay that is due tomorrow . wish me luck !	 
Night all - early call time tomorrow and need some beauty sleep !	 
I call em april babys cause they fools 	 
Singing the national anthem and praying at the soccer game tomorrow night :D	 
i would like to get to 200 followers tonight . 
This guy has it right . wanted to tell just about all my customers at work the same thing today ! 
I had no clue . someone brought it to my attention today !	 
Who 's gonna order online tonight ? 
Great Pyramid May Hold Two Hidden Chambers A 3-D simulation of the 4,500 -year-old structure suggests an ancient . 
May Perpetual Light Shine Upon Him 
SoCal , thanks for the lovely taste of sun ! I am returning to my ice village to be with my fellow ice people in my ice cave . In short ice !	 
 American shameless link for the 1st 3 eps  xxxx	 
homework not due until next tuesday but im so bored im about to do it right now	 
Work as though you would live forever , and live as though you would die today . ~Og Mandino	 
supposed to be really cold tonight . Er , do you want a place to crash ? I mean , my couch is pretty comfy ."	 
cause its fist pumping Thursday	 
The OverAchiever More Glory of the Cataclysm Hero Every Thursday , The Overachieve . 
I did so much work today	 
if you're talking about the guy you told me about today , I'm gonna smack you .	 
lol umm she 's ok i think , back home with mum now till sat so hopefully by then she be a lot better	 
Teach for America gets $100 million endowment on The Talk today . A very deserving organization ! 
Who doesn't want school tomorrow ? 
thinking about this salad ima have for dinner tonight lol wyd !	 
haha dude im still at work , swing by 16th floor when you're done with your thing	 
I really didn't wanna do anything today , but I have to clean my room and do the dishes and stuff . UGH .	 
omg ! I totes almost forgot it 's the 27th ! Super stoked !	 
yeah it 's suppose too be Saturday	 
sep clases de verano 
I dont live up to anyones expectations As a you may think that there is no one out there that co .	 
Your First Move For Friday , Jan . 28 What follows is a roundup of where the " Fast Money " traders think the market could . 
Sleep well guys - I'm all in Good night x	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Hey Brit , today is my birthday ! You can wish me happy birthday ? I love you unconditionally . 3 ComebackToBrazilBritney	 
yup ! he'll have her and her fb will be reactivated by tomorrow ! lol	 
Tom Brosseau - Tonight I am careful with you 
lol my fault son , I may come back up	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
I got a date with Netflix tonight	 
Sat would be absolutely awesome ! Let me know .	 
I was admitted to the PA Bar today !	 
Snow day = Mexican at our house . Taco night in progress .	 
Great boarding today !. tomorrow , acoustic sesh with the German again .	 
WikiLeaks announces its first interactive town hall Tuesday . . 
Apparently the leader of the EDL has been ' shot at several times ' tonight in Luton by a Muslim Gang . Oh dear .	 
Bored bored bored . Can't wait till tomorrow 
Good Morning everyone ^^	 
How are you today ?	 
Egypt internet disrupted , SMS down  - Internet service was disrupted in Egypt early Friday as . 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home f ." and got Part 4-Room five ! Try it 
it is . lol omg are you busy sunday 13th ?	 
The most AWKWARD moment of my life happened yesterday . To Catch A Predator should've been filming it	 
Watched Big Trouble in Little China for the first time yesterday and it is fucking awesome ! Thanks for mentioning it man !	 
tryin to .! im not happy W/ my performance today , it wasn't bad but i know i coulda did better . my heart just not in it anymore Fareal	 
Believe it or not . Netflix on my tv makes it possible to watch The Greatest American Hero . All night .	 
Think you might be able to break Kane 's elimination record this Sunday ?	 
April Shepard wins the tickets to see As I Lay Dying ! You'll have 2 tickets on the guestlist ! 	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Auburn 's updated national recruiting ranking for 2011 3rd on Scout , 6th on Rivals , 9th on ESPN	 
night after the 1st snow storm that I seen you .	 
Every news station says yes closed tomorrow i wish makes the notice if schools are open tomorrow or not	 
Today is the first day in five years that I actually feel like I'm ahead of the eight ball instead of behind it . It 's kind of awesome . 
Stop confusing me . Limited brain power tonight and I'm fucking freezing .	 
Yeah , we're hoping 2nd June 2012 but nothing booked yet , found a venue we like , just trying to decide if we can afford it .	 
right is that the registration time ? And thanks I'll have to figure out how my airport thing will work on Sunday without Amara	 
This may have leaked a new idea for movie leakers unable to bootleg . TMI	 
Answer to today 's trivia question Coffee represents 75% of all the caffine consumed in the United States ! Amazing !	 
Last nite , they had us in lower 40's, and they dropped 10 more degrees today . Are you going to continue and drop 10 - 20 more degrees soon ?	 
ran 1 mile and a half today . where were you ? pussy	 
had a beautiful day today	 
I'm gonna need rehab after tonight .	 
Had fun with and the ladies of Victorious today . .	 
is today ladies ! I can't wait !	 
Hate to hear Shanna 's injured . Guy 3 rows in front of me tonite is sporting a 5 jersey . SZC wore 5 .	 
What to wear tomorrow ? bullet proof vest !	 
Might try this tonight ! Damn ! Photo 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th  .	 
Smoking more than half a pack a day may cause infertility or irregular menstrual cycles in women . 
Can't wait to watch tonight always a pleasure to see them such a beautiful blessed family ! I want N	 
My cousins Steph and Megs do that . They get paid about $50 or so for one night .	 
I want a valentine ! Anybody tryna be my boo 4 1 night ?!?!	 
WIN a FREE silver pendant for Valentine 's Day . Just follow us and this tweet to enter ! Winner will be selected F .	 
I was supposed to start those today but it never happened  lol	 
1st rule about Don't let anything touch her . 2nd rule If something does , burn it immediately . There , happy ?	 
I stopped wearing those ugly ghetto so called " BRAND NAMES " back in 8th grade if you still wear them lol	 
Girls , remember each morning when u put on makeup , somewhere in the world a clown is starting his day doing exactly th .	 
the cafe was definitely tonight .	 
Who 's excited for the official premier of my music video tomorrow ?!?! xo Avril 	 
What is there to do tonight ?	 
Help us recognize an outstanding women and female young professional for the 20th annual Athena Awards ! 
just at the end of the night dont get mad when u got come out yo pocket pussy	 
I'm being scolded for not going to Jamaica in March . Sheesh !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
I can't believe I forgot to tweet having dinner with Stone Cold last night . We had a blast . We ate , Drank and Laughed Our Asses Off !	 
march is gonna be the BEST month for me . first mardi gras then spring break a week after . 
Yep . Lilacs . I love when something blooms in January . I saw daffodil buds today . Spring is almost here .	 
Self 1st then Family Friends , if there 's something left , then it 's Self again .	 
Happy Friday anyway fellas !	 
Checkout " Monday Networking Business U Magazine Launch Party at The Renaissance ." via . See u there .	 
July . They need band info now though .	 
had a amazing practice ! i made a amazing 2 pointer and was doing so well today home practice doesn't get cancelled tomorrow !	 
aww Tom from philly lost on jeopardy today .	 
I'm pretty sure the asshole that put the extra ' r ' in February is the same guy who thought up the spelling for Wednesday .	 
yeah we have an artichoke and anchovies pizza today so we ran out of A's, FUCK YOU ! - L hahahaahhaah	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:20 06 PM	 
Off to bed , disappointed as its not new series at all , its series 1 , typical bloody UK ! Night x	 
comedy night done right . all night . watch it .	 
Wish i didn't have to get up at 8am tomorrow on my Birthday . should be a good un though 	 
Got a big bag of them this morning Sue lol . Have some if you want 
Rick Carlisle on when will play , " It 's going to be a while ." Will not play tonight or Saturday .	 
Bakin ' brownies for the office potluck tomorrow . 
But Johnny Storm 's sacrifice was in vain , because is still on tonight .	 
Morons . You increase demand by LOWERING prices . Hulu may rebrand itself as cable-like TV bundle provider arst . ch/o1g	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
New Supernatural episode scheduled to air on Space TV on Wed Feb 2nd , 2 days BEFORE CW 
. Dear President Obama , Congress If Egypt goes police blood bath tonite , tomorrow , cut off all military aid immediately .	 
For dinner tonight Pasta with chickpeas , banana ' ice cream'.	 
Keep a track of our page and answer questions based on the telecast after the 30th . now win merchandise even after t .	 
Something tremendously rewarding about recovering from a slow morning by kicking the shit out of the afternoon 
lol yeah man they better bring out that g whistle tonight	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
I'd say that 's a pretty rad Thursday night .	 
I hope all my lovely authors are getting along today . .	 
I just want to stop crying for once today ive done NOTHING wrong ,	 
last tweet was yesterday 	 
I need some carolyn advice . Allie tells me to go to you . I think we may be going through some of the same things .	 
Don't forget " facebook Friday " - check out our wall tomorrow to see if you're the winner . Please share with your . 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
Hope bruh bring this jacket tomorrow .	 
goodnight ( haha how are you today ?	 
both not sure which one tonight	 
Federation of Indian Associations  presents Republic Day Celebrations on Sunday , January 30th , 2011 at the . 
Someone was supposed to take me to lunch today but they didn't 
Hoping Ferrer can pull off this win tonight . if Ferrer plays Djokovic in the finals my head will explode trying to decide who to root for !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
I wish it was Friday already .	 
If you wanted to go to school so bad , then wake up early tomorrow and go sit in front of the school .	 
in Sat Feb 5th with 
Th Egyptian National TV was broadcasting cartoons today . 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
There aint none@creole_cody dear -im ready for taboo night ! round up some eligible bachelors lmao	 
watched a movie yesterday wit Trent Kurt and me and fell asleep on our boys shoulders ! so romantic !	 
Free PDA Quoting Software for Life Insurance Companies :	 
ann-q emailed ? I last night chiong rj-blabla in like 10 to 15 minutes then go or liao . Didn't check 	 
Come party w/ at Tonight ! Get in FREE w/ a school ID ! Our official College  :/ .	 
FELLAS if you can't get her number tomorrow night at after , you just UGLY and shouldn't be going out .	 
ima need to exchange 's with someone in my paideia classes , causee i stay having questions abt whats due tomorrow . smh DAY 2	 
Hate when you wit one of yo friends at a hotel and dey gett da having sex and you gott to smell it all night lmao .	 
Love his stuff TODAY'S POST If I could hand you one business growth gift , this would be it = 
The Cowboys now have six players on the NFC Pro Bowl roster .Miles Austin announced Thursday on ESPN 's NFL Live . .	 
I'll be working at Frock Shop tomorrow from 11:00 to 7:00 if you're in the neighborhood . 	 
May the smoothest man win . 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
haha , it may  so suppppp	 
Dinner tonight Chickpea Cutlet on home-made pita topped with Tofu Scramble . Mmmm ! 
May the smoothest man win . 
Two minutes of HD NGP gameplay hits the web One particularly steady-handed participant of yesterday 's 2011 Pla . 
May the smoothest man win . 
Change of plans ! will return NEXT Friday , February 4 ! Patience is a virtue .	 
What 's your best sound bite of writerly advice ? Post it for Pay it Forward Friday right here 
Two minutes of HD NGP gameplay hits the web One particularly steady-handed participant of yesterday 's 2011 Pla . 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
LOL bring on the haters ! i love it haha you did nothing but make my night w . haters 3 thankyou	 
Practice Report 1/27/11 The Lakers , in defeating the Utah Jazz by 29 points on Tuesday , did a good job .	 
Almost ready for the open house . This Sunday 2-4pm .	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:20 04 PM	 
I can't wait ! When will the acoustic your new song " 2nd chance " be on Itunes ?	 
May the smoothest man win . 
This may be . by far the worst day of my life . 
May the smoothest man win . 
" My 1st nite hike , worried abt looking like a geek w/ a headlamp ." Don't worry ! Dark you'll blind anyone who looks at you !	 
If you missed Rebbie on The View today She did a wonderful jo .	 
I might be home Friday .  u got the number !	 
it 's ok ! I'll be on in ten ! you can come sat ! are you still off on Monday ? stay til then !	 
I think I may have won an award . Steak Risotto for dinner ? And its marinated in Baltic Porter ? Ok !?	 
Spare Times For Children , for Jan . 28-Feb . 3 Being the youngest child often has disadvantages , including hand- . 
packing heading to . hitting the city tomorrow	 
Astronomy lab time . And it 's finally a clear night . Hope we get to use the telescopes tonight	 
Vote for me ! 3 PAS MAY 2011 Calendar Model Model Search - cast your vote NOW ! 
Worked with something today called a Buddy Band .  Focused on " working as a team ." Quite a workout !	 
wake up 4-5 times a night . always tired ^tmc	 
im getting breakfast on the way to la tomorrow btw there are resturants in the lax hilton just so u know	 
Get your tix to our 7th Annual Superbowl Party . Talk to any staff member this weekend ! 
1st of all we all project . Second of all , I'm not . I am defend my nurse . which , without know here , you all chose to judge .	 
The long way home = less time in the cold so I took the long way today its mad extra but whatever	 
Dear Friday . I miss you - I hope you get here soon !	 
my book ran out of batteries while i was on the train this morning . stupid future .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Property taxes may rise in 2012 , as values decline | Houston Business Journal 
I wana drink my problems away tonight ! Lls me too cuzzo	 
Wow . Now thinking how to work that into conversation tomorrow . May have to print out and just hand to people in street .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Looking forward to with and tonight at 9PM EST !	 
night all me going to bed happy x	 
Now following from Thursday hop 
blake is like 4th overall in votes	 
Silence was the worst thing I heard today . R.I.P. To my MacBook Pro and my recent work .	 
Going great ! Busy , but great Morning ! I'm SO excited -- counting down ! How are the preparations going ?!	 
whatever helps you sleep at night	 
Property taxes may rise in 2012 , as values decline | Houston Business Journal 
Super Robust Robot Hand Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 28 look at 
so i'm going to get shit faced tommorow night . no questions asked .	 
I must look friendly today . White ppl keeping asking me questions	 
Justin Bieber help me to wish me happy birthday , My birthday is on March 3 
All kinds of yum at the Market today ! Fresh Sole , stuffed with Sockeye Salmon and Shrimp . $ 2.99 each , perfect for dinner tonight .	 
Someone is turning 29 tomorrow ! )	 
Got dressed in the dark , but I did a good job if I may say so myself	 
Couple ticket giveaways ya'llA pair for Lost in the Trees w/ Cheyenne Mize THIS SAT  AND	 
Survey flights search for right whale badly cut by boat propeller | | 
tonight i am shutting phone computer 855 so i can watch the BH reunion show .	 
Thinking about breakfast already . Not hungry , just excited . May try grits	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
gonna spend the night with 3 
Guess ill be lifting tonight nothing else to do . all I do anyway	 
Time to hit the sack . A long day an even longer one tomorrow .	 
Pope says atheists pick choose their morals . Correct . Today I will be frowning on child abuse not having a prob .	 
HMS HHS Show Choir dress rehearsal . Competition season begins tomorrow .  
I dunno ! But I just sat there and watched it lick butter XD	 
, in 4 hours . should say friends , fun , party , hangover in 4 hours	 
pink ice at the hockey game tomorrow :D im excited 
Eastenders was so dumb today	 
Built this and a snow fort today . 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
I love my jewelry wearing it again tonight	 
NEW Album rumored to be called " Shining Like The Sun ", come view the Details Tracklist HERE -- 
explore your fantasies Tonight in Iowa cock teen pornstars brunette anal naked cams pov	 
. they are shooting a movie on 7th St , in front of my house . This is like the 3rd shoot I've seen on 7th today ;  
Fuck 2nd quarter . lts nothing more l can do to help my grade so l'll just be working towards 3rd quarter .	 
Wearing my pajamas inside out tonight . not riskin the chance to have school tomorrow .	 
Blue Sky Cellar at is opening to the media tonight with a Little Mermaid ride update . More to come soon . 
i just saw a commercial for the 30th time . it still makes my heart stop . . 3 i cannot wait !	 
I said " I feel like a ghost " last night . Twas a joke	 
Yay kobe ! This year 's game on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
HAMSTERS are for children who capable for looking after them , not for teenagers . GOOD NIGHT !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
i hate unpacking ! lucky you have a 3 day weekedn tho then back to work on mon ? it can only get better as it will be february ! xx	 
Just realised I've been sat tweeting on my phone with my laptop open in front of me . oh Blackberry .	 
One of the highlights to my week is . Taco Thursday . knows how addicting Taqueria Del Sol can be .	 
The music today shows no truth . if I don't know better I would of thought everyone in the world is having fun and rich except me .	 
Stressed from here to next tuesday , I can't sleep . I don't like this at all .	 
actually I'll be back Sunday evening so , let 's do it	 
Oh geez Dina ~ you beam insight and savvy ~ can't wait to see you in March 
Two minutes of HD NGP gameplay hits the web One particularly steady-handed participant of yesterday 's 2011 Pla . 
Just for one day . I'll be back on Monday . U coming back tmrw ?	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:20 12 PM	 
LOL you and Sultan are hilarious  Look forward to tomorrow , might defend you tomorrow , depends if I cba xD You + Sultan = 3 	 
at the shooting range yesterday . decent grouping by myself . 
oh yeah tomorrow is Friday ! Haha	 
I'm working late . Catch me on 700 wlw midnight to 2 am tonight with the american trucking network	 
italian , greek mafia getting lessons from irish Corruption in Action today . with FF FG Lab connivance 
Black gator grads living in Soflo should follow Reminder Mixer Friday 6pm Satoro 's in downtown hollywood 
" i opened my freezer yesterday and i chicken fell on me " -mady allen	 
I remember you djing ., Mars , 2nd floor . Those were the days .	 
i actually wanted school tomorrow , oh well !	 
Crysis 2 review Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 31 look at 
Typical , I've been falling asleep all evening and now its bedtime I'm not tired .	 
Given how humans have evolved today in being more sophisticated w/ knowledge technology it makes the feasibility of 
' Lopes Men 's Basketball plays Chaminade tonight at home in Antelope Gym at 7:15 ! GO ' LOPES !	 
Home . Tired . Might get a ride home tomorrow tho . Or at least partially home .	 
I want to be the reason you smile but you got to believe the shit I tell you 1st ! 	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
i cant believe we in 3rd quarter already . time be flyyyinnnn	 
learned rewind by paulo on guitar tonight  also skins was shit . it just gets worse and worse every year .	 
Reunion tonight at 9pm . tonight at 10pm .	 
morning twitter  have a nice day 	 
NSAID use may be high among some athletes who don't always know about potential side effects 
detest people with bad body odour . im real lucky today as there is a few around	 
ok speak to u tomorrow going to Sleep na night  x	 
Who else is going to the Social Media Symposium this Friday Alumni Center ? We'll be there !	 
I realized it on Tuesday when I had a . thing with J . I had all these explanations in my head and I couldn't say them . =\	 
Let 's celebrate ! Everyone wear the ugliest thing you own to work tomorrow .	 
iTunes 10.1 . 2 is released - forgive me if I don't get too excited . Now iPad 2 may be a different story .	 
Beautiful Body Ideal Weight " Early Morning Exercise Tips !" remedies loss boomers 
good morning sa lahat . friday na ! love it	 
ooo haha i dont have clas friday or mondays either lol	 
Yo last night I counted every song have done for this new shock value . I counted 81 songs lol this fool w	 
Thanks Lori ! And may I say your hair looks lovely tonight ! lol	 
kay good  im excited to see you tomorrow !	 
Had my first dream about the Superbowl today , I'm sure there are many more to come ! 
me is very tired now so going to listen to the lords song then sleep . praise the lord for the night nurse	 
- Product of my inability to work and my attempt at reliving the concert from last night . 
Tonight 's Luau is being held in the Grand Garden . Entrance is at the Circle of Life near the Poipu Wing of the resort .	 
Had a long talk with myself . it did not end well . so I'm sending myself to bed early . Night	 
w/o realizing it , I was pressing my injured foot against the wall . Pulled it away and holy crap is it not healed yet . srsly stupid today .	 
" back to december " by taylor swift .	 
Don't forget -- mummy program on Sat !  .	 
yesterday was my 16th birthday . One of my wishes was for you to say happy birthday to me , its not to late , make it come true ?	 
GREAT executive summary of today 's seminar with . [ Thanks . You rock ! ]	 
The mall is today !	 
I have none . But the link 
gonna have 2 go 2 sleep now , good night	 
nothin to do today but chill	 
Gonna aim for three miles today . Probably won't make it , but we'll see !	 
charlie sheen was porn star melanie rios last night too , which sucks bc shes fantastically hot  and this .	 
He may not tell you , but he loves being pampered too . 
On the upside the BF and I are planning to visit them in March . Can't wait for sun and the beach ! And the Alamo !	 
sorry to tell you this but no til next friday . it`s no joke	 
I have a recurring dream where I have a 2nd apt . in chinatown that I use for writing and performance practice . Alway .	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
Sunday . me an my sis versus U an yo Bro ?	 
good morning too Pat !	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Thursday a.k.a. best night of TV shows .	 
A positive attitude may not solve all your problems , but it will annoy enough people to make it worth the effort . Herm Albright	 
I'm so fucking stoked for the show tomorrow !	 
Joe Denning doesn't plan on doing anything special at 10:59 a.m. Saturday when he becomes mayor . More in tomorrow 's Daily News 
I was very critical myself , still am . Not about Bachmann 's decision to speak , but to do it right after Ryan on the same night .	 
I hope theres a two hour delay tomorrow ( :	 
Playing in Luton tomorrow , with our new live set ! Cannot wait , hope to see some of you help us tear the place up ! 
hey new episode air tonight finally ! jajaja	 
tonight , im gonna be ya wonder woman 3	 
It 's a sad day in Nashville today . Going to miss that Mullet . 
Got Arroyo Valley HS today  Senior night ! Wish me Luck .	 
In my life , she has burst like the music of angels , the light of the sun !	 
just let me know I'm ready as long as it 's a Friday or saturday	 
You can raise funds for your non-profit using this source . . I may keep them in mind .	 
The word is out about our Sunday brunch ! We hope to see you here for our first service on Sunday , March 6 . 
Good Lord , I have to get a coach at WHAT time on Saturday for the meet-up ? Are Sherlock fangirls really worth this ? 	 
Dead Space 2 's mine on Sunday . Homefront apparently was written by some of the talent behind Red Dawn and Apocalypse Now . Want .	 
well that would explain your very ~ Canadian ~ afternoon .	 
Long weekend kicks off for most in about 4 hours , if you're going out on the harbour , Monday is looking sunny ! ^HB	 
yes valentine 's day is coming up . but fellas , remember to remind ya girl steak and bj day is February 15	 
It 's gone be a long night in this bitch	 
that 's a nice compliment coming from my favourite tweeter  nighty night x	 
Join us tomorrow for a live Q&A on fish with small pet expert John Gerstenberger , starting at 3pm EST right here on Twitter .	 
r u in night class right now ?	 
let me think a 19 yo worked first party saturday , made $520 , minus 10% tip out , so $468 take home . party lasted 100 minutes	 
morning , love !	 
this is the last day of weekday . is there any of you who have a special plan today ?	 
Micro , psyc , and nutrition tests all in a row . starting tomorrow :/ 
Actually looking forward to LongHorn tonight	 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
late for work this morn cos I was too tired to wake up . getting up at 6 tomorrow and am exhausted - so WHY AM I NOT IN BED ? 
Friday would work for me .	 
Just got my to support . In theaters February 11 . Show your support 
Snow Leopard install tonight , crossing the fingers that shit doesn't explode .	 
I dont think ill go to school tomorrow , maybe just for 4th and 5th .	 
My phone been acting dumb since yesterday like its off but I been on twitter all day n yesterday 
1st set of U.S. Thin Lizzy dates  - 
February is always a good month . So much candy due to Valentine 's day !	 
give me a bell when you finally get up today bro 	 
good luck today bro .	 
I will be in the building at the AHS vs . FHS basketball game tonight	 
Haha ! Yes . I was playing Dynasty Warriors Last night , because I can't sleep . And I also got to work for my new illustration . =3	 
Tanning in Eugene in January . nbd	 
Today is not a good day . 126 days till graduation 3	 
Today on the blog - , and - 
Watching tosh stand up ! I could c myself waking up 2 him every morning ! Haha !	 
Hi all Good Morning ! I'm not saying that I'm superior but I'm good , so then I wont worried .	 
I have a feeling that tomorrow could be ' s annual NBA trade value collumn . call me crazy .	 
NOT in my bed or nuffin . We made cupcakes together today ! =D	 
So i went to the gym this morning . Tell me why i see like 4 BIG chicks sitting on the floor eating pizza hot wings ! Lol . Really ? In .	 
Djing Bull Bear tonight for their 2 Yr Anniversary with 
Oh thanks god its friday !	 
Monday 9:30 AM I get my new DVR ~ it'll sure B nice 2 have 350 hrs 2 record all the shows I watch 	 
Tomorrow is a defining moment in Egypt 's modern history . Everything is on the line . Make sure the world is watching supporting ! 
BREAKING Intl news media unable to report on stunning events in 3rd World due to years of cuts to foreign bureaus , .	 
Determined to win her back , 50 Cent -- who was first spotted canoodling with the " Chelsea Lately " host in October	 
main my mama had to borrow some of my money she said she gone pay me back wednesday	 
and you will tho ! You've got plenty of time , it'll be nicer outside when u go too . Aren't u going in June ?	 
Porter , founder of the , will be on today at 5 - sharing his perfect playlist of music to go along .	 
Dear everyone replying me that today isn't New Years Eve , There are other places besides the USA , egomaniacs . Regar .	 
anytime ;-) how are you doing this evening ?	 
Aye call Judy nd get a 10-4 from her bout tomorrow at Vain ! I really want to see chill with ya !	 
I've been having trouble sleeping at night . I know it 's not healthy , but force choking myself works a lot better tha .	 
Second Chance - Shinedown explains exactly how I'm feeling lately . I really just wanna get up and leave one night , and not look back .	 
It 's today thru Sat at the hotel off San Jose at that comedy Club . Tickets like 20 something which ain't nothing .	 
Hi there and thanks so much for RT'in my stuff today . I really appreciate it . I'm gonna check out your website now .	 
New photo album posted of 14th Mo 's Crab chowder Festival 2011 . " Like " us on our Facebook Page .	 
Ok y'all haters can't stop me . Stole my car in Dec . getting a BETTER ONE in Jan . =) thanks !	 
Me and Mel are gonna sing Nicki Minaj songs tomorrow xD I had to print off lyrics for her because she doesn't know any of her songs xD	 
It 's a " can't miss " show today as we go behind-the-scenes of his new music video " The Shape I'm In " with Joe . :/ .	 
Downloading monday 's episode of I missed last night on my 
== Courage is the discovery that you may not win , and trying when you know you can lose .	 
I'm about 1/3 through awards , but they're due tomorrow !	 
Cyanide and Happiness - Dogs Top rated in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 36 look at 
Bout to head to sleep so i can leave n da morning	 
lOl ! She better let me pop that champagne for her . Imagine , Im JUST going to sew my dress tomorrow s	 
U was how old when ur 1st time 
thats what i meant ! lets relive these moments on sunday ! haha x	 
would give my left nut to feel the sun on my skin . wait ! I don't have one ! Guess I'm screwed ! hahahaha sigh	 
Good morning at you too . :D	 
Who said 1 million is a powerhouse .?I got my sample in today and put quite a fair amount on me an . 
so sad just missed ya ! Tomorrow !	 
Forthcoming Art Department album coming out on Crosstown Rebels sounds amazing . Dark early morning vampire club vibes .	 
Mine was good too  I'll be going to a concert on Saturday , I'm really excited 	 
can someone feel me in on the interview Que did last night ?	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two hours until 5 pm on Friday	 
If the information blackout is not lifted before the Friday prayers , then you must say a prayer for Egyptians . God .	 
God woke you up this morning to see another day ! That 's more than enough to be " Thankful " for .  .	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
Posted a few pictures of Samantha , a new P&S Girl who was on our Hottie Cam this past Tuesday ! How are you holding up with this snow ? -olive	 
Can we cancel all plans and parties for Saturday so I can go to 's showing of Repulsion and Rosemary 's baby ?	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
USDA cave on GE alfalfa is a disaster for all . Will you speak on this at Univ of Pdx talk on Apr 16 ?	 
Official high in today .  
gonna buzz tonight at Gran Melia Hotel !	 
Yay date night ! Meadowlark for dinner and Winan 's for some coffee . Probably gonna watch last weeks Fringe tonight . Love my wife .	 
my dsa loves can come and stay a night with .	 
So earlier today , I was freaking out because I thought I'd get worse ADTR seats , until I saw the total price and relaxed again . ( :	 
Egypt police fire tear gas as rioting erupts in Cairo Most viewed in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 37 look at 
Going to the CHA show tomorrow . Follow for all the great news from the show .	 
ahah none and thats not till friday ahaha( :	 
tomorrow 's friday ! on saturday will I take a rest . NOT ! I'm poor ! :' (	 
whatever tomorrow brings , I'll be there	 
thanks babe ! The sun is already setting !  You make everything magic . I love you baby ! 3 You are my DESTINY !	 
thanks , top 128 on the 7th go to knock out stages =)	 
They want power . We want freedom . They have guns . We have cellphones . They're ready 2 kill . We're willing 2 die 4 bet .	 
i see more than me got that fresh cut today	 
why you keep telling me your same " I was drunk last night " stories ?	 
Bid now on a Fender Stratocaster guitar signed by . Auction ends Jan . 29 
I'm thinking ima go in and make steak tonight . Hmmmm	 
Morning meeting BP 's Rosneft deal met with US anger BP'S deal with Russia 's Rosneft to explore for oil in the . 
Jersey shore tonight properrr	 
see i told ya and was providing entertainment for the evening	 
No school tomorrow .	 
Play 6 men  Blazer fans what is the most important thing the Blazers can do tonight in order to beat the celtics ?!	 
Clowney sees recruiters on Thursday 
Why do I have to finish at 1 today ? 	 
God bless my maid , took her 7 hours today for the inaugural cleaning of the new house/farm ; looking shiny clean now ! 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
I ate some load today S	 
The 2011 State of the Union Address Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 38 look at 
well hello Friday . i have been waiting for you ! 
First fitness test with the night class great job gang way to haul A## !	 
Can we do some shit up tomorrow !	 
Thanks for the advice  . I may just do that .	 
I think that I may have been born without the " wait , you shouldn't do that !" gene .	 
Beer O'Clock? Pop into the Bridge this Avo/Evening mention this tweet and receive a free BEER ! 28.01 . 11	 
all these avenues were rinsed , long . a man sed i got till tuesday night n dere was no studio avaliable	 
What is the name of the Donut Shop on the Simpsons ? Want a Homer Simpson donut tomorrow at Dozen Bake Shop ! ?	 
TW filming carried on at Rhossili Bay today on the beach  . Prob finished at location now . 
3789 now i think i better buy some now , i bet they will have all gone in the morning .	 
The Irish Sun focussing on the important issues of the day , I see .	 
Who 's studio could I get into tomorrow ? Hmu please .	 
can't wait til Jersey effin shore tonight .	 
On the bright side , totally made my day at swim today . ( ;	 
Natural is listed as d-alpha tocopherol instead of dl-alpha tocopherol . -Check out our Vitamin E you may be impressed 
Pet Monkeys Seize the Day Top rated in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 39 look at 
was so excited for the vampire diaries tonight but i dont think i can watch it :' (	 
Seems like a good night to watch Pride and Prejudice . again .	 
I hope I got class tomorrow though .	 
morning too , gi pa ?	 
I'm up for anything . I can take a bus or train up early . End of Feb should work for me too ! Thoughts ?	 
Thank goodness tomorrow is Friday	 
I really can't wait to go to church this Sunday was in the er last Sunday and sick the Sunday before that smh not this weekend 	 
You mad huh ? Yea I bet you are lol . Gunna be a good night .	 
To much liquor in my house for me not to be on some sort of level every night . That 's bout to change	 
Join us at the LA In Store Thursday , Feb 3rd from 6pm to 8pm at the Hard Rock Cafe 6801 Hollywood Blvd 
tomorrow should be fun ! 
; the shit you did makes me want to whoop your ass but i was told i can't hit you until after fri . so sat anything goes right 
So my friend is going to D.C. tomorrow without me .	 
Exercise etiquette at gym to keep workouts friendly .The month of January invariably brings a new crop of ex . 
so far it 's Glee meets Mean Girls , but they've filmed in my 2nd favourite mall , so it 's ok 	 
As a know when to stop , as you may offer more advice than is customarily needed or wanted for that .	 
yea and today is the last day , I stoked up on some nice essentials right now . Cardi and vnecks	 
Come to " Echo Canyon Star Hike  . 
~Jeopardy was good tonight .	 
Hey young gurl . How u feeling today ? Sending love and affection from across the ocean . Stay swit .	 
why is thursday like the national college party day ? haha	 
haha i'm fine too thx  just a bit tired bc i didn't sleep last night - what the odds right 	 
Great day of boarding , gonna keep it low key tomorrow then kill it on Saturday .	 
hey you two ! How are ya this evening ?	 
she 's a snitch . I don't even wanna make this trip home tomorrow for that move son	 
you've been alive for 2 decades today . and known me for 1 and a half of them , lucky you  happy birthday 3	 
Yes , it does , but it won't change the math a lot , just the fact of none of them having a birthday today .	 
NYT names new Sunday biz editor 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
yes they do ! depending on which saturday if its my weekend to work or not lol	 
Apple and News Corp . announce February 2 event to unveil The Daily 
sparring my teammate tonite ! just a lil touch up !	 
Our 5-10 minute ' test ' today- " Alright , we're not going to do the test conditions , so . just don't look at the paper of the ppl next to u "	 
I'm getting another tat saturday ! and oh boy told me he'd do it for free if i gave him head nonstop . so does this mean its not really free ?	 
From Trish 's page last night -- we were bored doing this rehearsed part . 
Omg jersey shore tonight roney and sammi O cant wait	 
Disney Fantasy Studios Auditions [ Open ] Most responded in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 41 look at 
Almost there Opening of Ryan at the Show Tell Gallery tonight !	 
Wrestling notebook Both OU , OSU in home duals Friday With a win , the Cowboys will become only the second wrest . 
I know ! Had a quick look but my email wouldn't load it properly , so must mess about with it tomorrow . But :D :D :D	 
Holly dear ! mwah mwah The infancy of the morning is truly blessed by your tweet as is one x x x x x x x	 
Well my battery 's about to run out so Good Night .	 
Fuck it me and getting married today . and all you bitches that be hating can catch the bouquet	 
What days are you unable to go 	 
March 29th but until then go watch ' s new video ft . Too Short 
Such an interesting video Lindt Chocolate on Boston Chronicle last night 
Working on my presentation on cellular alarm monitoring for the HBA Home Show tomorrow , titled " No Phone Line ? No Problem " 
American Idol tonite , Steven Tyler we like you much better than Simmon . Check it out .	 
" Live today , for we die tomorrow ".	 
Good news indeed . I shall sleep easier tonight safe in the knowledge that I can reheat my next fish supper	 
Thank god , today is Friday ! :D	 
Tune into conan tonight ! An awesome band is playing .  !	 
dang , gotta head to West Palm Beach tomorrow for work . dreading the drive	 
If your gonna follow anyone today , make it 
I have resisted for now , but I may cave later out of curiosity .	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
Scary Creatures of the Night Vampires From the Twilight World 
well today my panties are annoying me . so im contemplating ditching them !	 
morning ! how 's your sleep , bro ? good enough ?	 
Today is Nat'l Chocolate Cake Day . Put down that fork - drink up ! German Chocolate Cake .	 
girl just being sick and needing to read and study 2 chapters for a test on Monday . I'll do that Saturday	 
I feel " replenished " after a good night 's sleep . I wish I wake up like this everyday .	 
Looking forward to tonight ! 
it was unlucky on Wednesday just need to win on Saturday and then Wednesday against the wee team !	 
same same yo yu got plan for saturday ?	 
This IS my favorite stop along Highway 50 . Stocked up again on Monday . 
me too ! and tomorrow night ! 
really wish i could have gotten tickets to the rascal flatts concert tonight.i've been wanting to see them in concert forever ! 
Aw really ? Is it almost mid night ?	 
i'm gonna be in fondy for that show on friday , maybe thursday ?	 
Extreme Cash Robot Now in version 2.1 Just checked my account , again more features added today . 
you were actually amazing tonight in birmingham , one of the best concerts ever by far 3 3 3	 
lol well as long as ur getting good grades ! when do we even get our 1st semester results ?	 
Thanks for the shout out 's for my gig this Sat night Come and see my band play it'll be fun	 
Thanks , we'll pick the car up at ten will make a little trip with it , don't know yet where to . Hope you can sleep tonight !	 
I'm debating about writing another chapter tonight . I was told by one of my editors that my third chapter sounds a bit like Dawn of the Dead	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Zach Novak may be great at shooting three-pointers , but he will always be a douchebag . 
Off to Sydney tomorrow for the Summer Series . looking forward to some more racing , esp the mystery medley . wonder what order I'll get ?	 
Gonna be on again around 530pm today talking Idol !	 
Amazon sold " millions " of the 3rd generation Kindles and net sales increased 36% last quarter 
Cold outside but finally headed home . Might finally watch Red tonight .	 
I hate having mercer 3rd period . -_______-	 
That 3 hour 9am tomorrow going to kill me 	 
double monopoly tomorrow ?	 
For weekends i can only do friday nights after 10:30 , and anytime on saturdays  . i like everything !	 
RSD 13 just canceled school for tomorrow . Are you fucking serious ?	 
Blue Sky Cellar at is opening to the media tonight with a Little Mermaid ride update . More to come soon .	 
Nature Studies by Michael McCarthy The 21st century bodes ill for non-human species 
" hotter than hell in July " lol !	 
yes u have till march 21 to be with McDavid until spring starts that 's wat said march 21	 
Sleep time Night Tweet hearts xx	 
I have plans tomorrow night :/	 
Charlie Sheen story pretty crazy . We have it on tonight at 7 and 11:30 . and .	 
is heading to the Windbreak tonight for some FANTASTIC music ! If you 21+ peeps know what is good for you you shall be there as well ! 3	 
today was not my best jeopardy day	 
Team Heat vs . Knicks tonight . hmm , who takin the win followers ?	 
what you up to Sunday ?	 
I hope my mother say I don't have to go to school ! Tomorrow It 's a mess out there and in the morning it 's really going be a mess !	 
i like you i want you and i miss you and i BETTER see you tomorrow thats how i feel	 
Ahh . right sleep . I knew there was something else i had to do last night .	 
Weighing the Risks of 2nd Mortgages 
kuntrynoizproductions.bandcamp.com . sprinkle some of this on ya evening .	 
We are shutting it down this Saturday 
Final interview tomorrow ! 	 
This morning it was " Oh Happy Day " - the way the kids sing it in sister act 2 's the only way I have ever heard it )	 
Final Japanese night today . nighty night !	 
I saw that at the mall today . it smells so good	 
she 's had a little boy today , bless her . Mother and baby are doing just fine .	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
I was thinkin bout makin shrimp tonight , hmmmm	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
about your casey leavin you dream , just know that it may or may not happen . it 's scary but it 's  
Friday Freebie and kit New Release 
wrestling with lightheadedness at work today . glad to be working where I am and who I'm with tho .	 
ok so monday it is 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
tournament with tomorrow !	 
It 's not misleading . In the data released by the ONS , public spending increased by 8% in Nov by a further 5% in Dec . Fact .	 
Kendall was in my dream last night . and NOT carlos . hmm	 
Drink everytime Ron and Sam get into a fight tonight .	 
Admins greet you good morning ! Thank god it 's friday ! Have a wonderful day ! ^o^	 
morning juga Morning all 	 
long story . but in the end im grounded and missing my friends 18th birthday . s im just really sad right now .	 
Sara 's making me hang out with her and " bond " with her tomorrow	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
going to the bar tonight im not drinking 	 
I'm sure the bar tender was giving you subliminal hints . AAA . Tonite was good . Pretty girl rock .	 
The dastardly dog tricked me into letting him outside , then raced back and sat in my chair . 
boredom ! I am two days without playing the guitar more this agony will go tomorrow night , I hope so .	 
today last day to work ?	 
Having an ill units party for my 30th tonight at Left Off The Rocks . Ready to get ill . yeeowww	 
You will wake up tomorrow . Underwater .	 
This has to be the most pitiful 8th grade game I have EVER seen ! -when is any 8th grade game crunk ? Lol	 
onna late night i cant take no naked pics for you =(	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Fri 28th Jan , 1 to 5 million people in the US , NZ Can will gain a new awareness of child trafficking ! 
Th Egyptian National TV was broadcasting cartoons today . 
Boots Appliances . Enjoy some nice big savings at Boots Appliances today . 
Have no idea what time this girl fell asleep . Now i'mma be up all night w/ her . 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
So , who 's coming out to on Feb 11th to see us with , This Year 's Tiger , and All a .	 
In Mexico and it 's looking unlikely that I'll see a coffee today 
Goodluck , have a nice day =D Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking .	 
Btw , I checked out your site last night . some really good music up there . Feel free to holla at me if you need a studio/engineer	 
Tonight 's challenge , create an image map that works within a WordPress blog post . Using this as a guide - 
yeah that 's good I don't haha ahh well guess I'll have to survive . January proper drags aswell xx	 
Me wanna go out tonight	 
Mtv my pillow for the rest of the night .	 
saturday im booked but friday . anything is possible	 
Bob Marley , Rascal Flatts , Toby Keith , Glee Cast and Sinatra joined me on my afternoon jog . Where were you ? 
going to dress up and look really pretty tomorrow 	 
can I get a hey from you . It would really make my night . PLEASE ! wifey did ! Lol	 
Starting a rails 3 project today , which ruby 1.87 or 1.92 to use and why ? 
Yes I like it ! Today I knew him , here in Madrid . Great person and very kind !	 
explore your fantasies Tonight in Kansas 
Gonna pre-order the new album tonight once my check gets cashed ! But i thought it came out March not april ?	 
Close call tonight ! A skier interrupted Diane Sawyer on from Central Park ! VIDEO 
The snow may have stopped , but the cold sets in for those without electricity 
I saw American Idol last night , how the hell can ppl say that the man with the disabled fiancee was exploiting her ? I mean really ! smh	 
What to wear tomorrow ? bullet proof vest !	 
Just came from practice , which was finally good today . About to eat my spaghetti and fish , take a shower , and then play w/ iTunes . .	 
no .! I promise to God I was doing homework all night .	 
Lots of schools closed Friday 1/28/11 . Check the list 
Counted 18 abandoned cars on the way to work today ." only " 3 on the way home . Wow !	 
yupp fri mon tues wed thurs	 
One must watch tonight ! 	 
how much have you had to shovel today ? This winter is kicking everyones ass ! Stay warm .	 
How many people have ever just sat down and read the dictionary ?	 
Thursday night plans ?	 
' she walks the night '	 
today was unreal . march 4th march 4th march 4th march 4th im excited :D goodnight	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
what 's wrong with your legs ? x I'm a little stressed , I seem to be speeding tonight yet taken drunk nothing . 
My brother 's school had off tomorrow . All Catholic Boys Schools are fulla a buncha wimps .	 
Time for a good ol ' shower and bout to get dressed tonight .	 
No luck today :/	 
he 's so exhausted has been sleeping practically the whole day lol but he was very excited to see me when I picked him up today .	 
no school tomorrow =/	 
Obama Talks Up Entrepreneurs During SoU Address -- don't make more than $250k or you may be super-rich . 	 
Thurs best tv night 30 rock , the office , jersey shore , parks and rec ., porn on HBO ,	 
starts Tuesday night on Sky Atlantic in the UK ! Woo-hoo ! Can't wait	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
Some pictures of Ferrari Team has revealed last night . Seems cool but here is the meaningful question How much can be effective ? 
I know ! And I'm supposed to renew april 1st !	 
MUST go to the gym on saturday and sunday . too tired after working long days . must make this work somehow !	 
Eating a tin of pineapple before I go to sleep . Might make me feel better . Night . I'll be back if I can't sleep . X	 
Working on the floor plan for the March 26th show !	 
Kindle Books Now Outselling Paperbacks at Amazon - The future may be a paperless wasteland .	 
Late dinner tonight , smells so good though , shrimp fried rice with jumbo shrimp and crab rangoon , yum !	 
not getting my hopes up . but thanx ! . i may not even have anyone to go to the C-bus show with me now , so whatever	 
On my way to the night shift liife	 
So Excited ! Bob Dylan and Grassroots Festival in the same week ! I will see you in April !	 
today was a waste of time DAY	 
If you gonna follow someone today , make it 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Man , has lost 1/2 his audience since last January and over 300 advertisers . Yet Fox keeps him on air . He must have pics on Ailes .	 
nope . its due monday .	 
They add days to the end of the year for us . So we'll be out of school on a Tuesday instead of a Thursday .	 
Session Daily - Harming police dog penalty may increase - Minnesota House of Representatives 
Last minute , make-shift shoot went pretty well today . Pictures look so pretty !	 
what yu get up to today beccy ? X 	 
No club for me tonight .	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
Wtf granny ! girl get it together !	 
im glad i dont have to sit in mrs landis ' class for 60 minutes tomorrow .	 
ewww . we are supposed to get more than " nuisance " snow monday . that 's what they have been calling a few inches on the radio	 
i think ill talk to him tomorrow about it  ~luke~ 
Help reach 600 followers by tomorrow ! ( he 's badass !	 
I love today is my Friday ! Swish	 
Yesterday my dad told me I'ma have to start paying rent at the house , I live on campus -__- lbh	 
Well , it seems we'll have an extra day in Pittsburgh  for a heavily Locke Key promo agenda ! Stay tuned fo .	 
Happy Friday ! What are your plans for the weekend ? A friend of ours is having a Hens party on Sat . Bring on the Bubbles !	 
Rick Nash goes in the 3rd round USA TODAY 's All-Star mock draft . 
I watched you on lopez last night , you rock ! You should follow me .	 
today has been a good day , just feeling tired for some reason .	 
'' do you remember when we first met ?  Was some time in early september.''	 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
I cant help my rudeness today or for the rest of the week its really nt my fault .	 
knicks v . heat game tonight then lavo !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Be better than you were yesterday .	 
I'm pretty sure the asshole that put the extra ' r ' in February is the same guy who thought up the spelling for Wednesday .	 
Looks like no sleep for me tonight . My flatmate back with some DVDs and . Hmmmm	 
Happy Thursday . Did you guys get any snow ? We got a total of 19 inches .	 
Digital One gave you a lot of love in the meeting yesterday . ---- awesome thanks !	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
But personally I don't think they will do a tour this summer , may be following summer but with euro 2012 this summer makes sense	 
God bless you  ) Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking . Go 
I'm featured on the 3rd verse of Premonition 's " Kingship " feat . Silent Knight Here 's the download link 
Of TNT 's 6-member crew tonight , Charles Barkley was the only one to not have Russell Westbrook as an All-Star reserve . His pick Monta Ellis	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
Today was a fun day . Can't complain 	 
instructing Intro to Facebook tonight LIVE - wish it were Twitter - more bang for learners buck I think !	 
Help Getting to Sleep at Night 
that sounds fabulous ! Saturday ? This is a possibility I'll just have to figure out how to get there	 
Chasing the Egyptian riot police Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 52 look at 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
announcing their lineup on Tuesday ! 
Where 's the real music at ? I don't want to listen to today 's trash . it 's just not how I roll .	 
Oh yeah . It 's friday !	 
" We are aware of reports of disruption to service and have seen a drop in traffic from Egypt this morning " - Facebook to Reuters by e-mail .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
I visited my Hubby on the military base at work today . Since I'm super cool with his sergeants I got to go all over the place ! 
I need moves for tonight immediately .	 
so far they're thursday and friday next week . but you gotta sign up for a time slot in the office .	 
just cooked and ate spaghetti with sauce and spices ! yogurt for august rain 
If it gets heavier than yesterday I'll start worrying that it 's the weirdest and earliest period I've ever had .	 
This year marks the 15th anniversary of everything that happened in 1996 .	 
Why You Need to Sleep Well at Night 
Hey who else is planning on driving today ? Is it going to be me , Renee and Neil ?	 
san miguel team must win tonight !	 
support an Auburn alum on American idol tonight- Paul McDonald !	 
Hello good morning :D  )	 
how can the be 66 in Denver tomorrow ? 
my shirt came today but i'm in charleston now :/	 
woot i dont have to dj tonight the old lady has air	 
" So why 's tomorrow gonna be the best onion ? I mean . day ." -Me , fifteen seconds ago	 
back to december .	 
No my paper there a article that says junk food may led to depression . Holy crap . = . =	 
yeah im worried fo tomorrow i have one more thing to get for dance	 
we should have no school tomorrow LOL it seems like a friday right now .	 
Good morning everyone . Time to let the good vibes in .	 
Ask President Obama Top favorites in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 52 look at 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Friday 1/28 DCPS will open two hours late . Essential school personnel report on time . Admin offices open on time . .	 
Watching again making sure i know everything before the new Episode tonight !	 
schoolboy ! Think u need to put them away again , try bringing them back about June !	 
You may hate to admit it but Justin Bieber 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Did you buy the blu-ray movie about your boy secretariat that was released today ?	 
oh . I thought you were leaving this morning . When do you get to Philly ?	 
lmfao nvm im confusing you , but its on a tuesday feb 1st :o	 
Don't forget our mAT coverage tomorrow on justin . tv ! 
Pleasantly surprised that 's senior advisor is tweeting supporting statements in Arabic regarding .	 
As a non medical person it sound about like mine , I would call your doc tomorrow	 
Since isn't new , I can watch instead of recording it.I'll help Fox get better ratings tomorr .	 
Tune in tomorrow  to and see us live on ESC ! Show starts at 9 . pm and is available all o .	 
MyLifeIsAverage - Life is pretty normal today via 
Hell no . u slow today What 's H.D ? Davis ? I'm get a part time job as the  
just walked into pac sun , heard chelsea playing . sang the rest of the song to the entire store 	 
damn what ima do tonight ?	 
Voucher Ends Today ! Thompson Morgan - Free Postage and Package at Thompson Morgan Free Postage and Package . 
Renee  is really like my sister . Her being my 1st cousin is an understatement	 
into your touch , I turn my head to place a kiss on your palm* You won't object to spending the rest of the evening-	 
You receive a job application sent at 11.35 Thur night . In it , the writer claims to love iCal , has opinions on social media ' gurus'. 
Where u gonna be at tonight ? 
. But I'm in a trance Hey baby tell me can't you hear me calling I'm in a trance I take too much in the Saturday night .	 
. and night night !	 
Very relaxed recovery ride tonight ! I wonder how long it will take to add 100 watts to my functional threshold power ?	 
Steal my face . only today .	 
Imma go for a run tonite	 
Mr . Davidson said we will have a pep rally tomorrow if everybody assigned detention goes . 
your actions may speak louder than you words but sometimes your word hurts more than your actions .	 
i'm with you on that , stone cold/rock comes in close 2nd	 
I haven't straightened my hair in a while . I think ill do that tonight .	 
OMG it 's so fun ! i can't wait to see you . haha oh i know  but you get to see me tomorrow ! so that 's good 	 
Second Chance - Shinedown explains exactly how I'm feeling lately . I really just wanna get up and leave one night , a .	 
My high school Garfield Heights High School the team in Cleveland plays St Ed tonight another top 5 team in the area .	 
The 2011 NBA All-Star Ballot was unveiled today ! via not too surprised about the choices honestly .	 
it really just depends on WHAT you eating rather than how much . and ill be in the HPE weight-room tonight from 7-10	 
yeah am already sore and wobbling out the door haha going to be hurting tomorrow !	 
Had a really fun night out with great ex colleagues . So many people , so few on twitter 	 
i see that today was the most insane day on twitter EVER ! also khole kardashian asked gaga to tweet the lyrics  , only gaga !	 
dude , I wish you were there tonight ! I had a gift card malfunction ! We want to come see you guys !	 
Set up recurring payments today with  This will be my first , car so I'm super excited ! I think I'm gonna love ' em .	 
Photo Yes . Green Day was in my 6th grade yearbook . I was pissed cause they cut Tre out . 
how sweet ! I'm so getting one when I go in March !	 
March 29th but until then go watch ' s new video ft . Too Short .	 
Yup yup , I looked that shit up last night after I saw it said espn3.com , haha	 
We're setting up as a wedding venue - hopefully we will be ready for August launch . Are you near me ?	 
raise your hand if you're single for the night~	 
the one things that 's missing is because she didn't put '' i'll take you out tonight say whatever you like ''	 
fridays tomorrow . yeah , that 's all I have to say lol	 
Good Morning my frens~   
The world won't end in 2012 because Harry 's kids go to Hogwarts on September 1st , 2017 . 
Love sleeping in ! Woke at 230pm today .	 
iyiyi cant wait til simpson saturday ! i wont cry my heart out if you dont this but if you do id cry my heart out in joy	 
Back for the day tomorrow . sis is gettin her wisdom teeth pulled n i must take care of her	 
Where u gonna be at tonight ? 
morning sexy babe .	 
i remember before wiz khalifa raped the radio , he did " the thrill " track with empire of the sun , that nearly blew my mind , indie hip hop .	 
That people 's house is so yesterday Gloria Borger seems impressed that Bill Daley is bringing corpora .	 
vote ya bitches . last day . and i signed up yesterday so do it ! 
Auditions OPEN ! Fun Forever Most recent in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 57 look at 
yep ! And the fact that you make me and cookies at night is a plus !	 
I still have a good feeling about March and May 
technically that 's today .	 
Ok my bro is 17 turns 18 in Sep . And his girl friend turned 15 the 5th tht makes her 11 months older thn me . We were both born in 96 gross !	 
i am scared to go to bed . i dont wanna miss anything but i am super tired . so i will hit the X button now ! good night !	 
We'll have tour setup for these by tomorrow . They should verify profile load fresh content on our site www.ivinox.com	 
To watch Friday  ; Will totally cut communications with the outside world ? 
Who 's all watching tonight ?	 
has just discovered his Philosophy class has assigned 100+ pages of homework reading to do before Wednesday . Is quite shocked	 
Don't know if I should stay up all night and revise or wake up really early . 
Dang it ! I have a slight fever ! This sucks . I need to get better by tomorrow ! 	 
We have a plan , Sandridge says , but they may not want to share it with everyone . || The revolution will not be tweeted ! 
" To be tested is good . The challenged life may be the best therapist ." Gail Sheehy	 
No school today , but my freaking maid woke me up at 8+am == WTF .	 
Do we have school tomorrow ? 	 
Everything is set up ! Let the night begin !  Eek !	 
's 1st TV commercial will be airing this week during the X Games - 
I'm tired of everybody acting like they cool cause they smoke I hit my first blunt in 7th grade its nothing new	 
Worried about your rental property ? Need photos ? We serve Corona Del Mar for Process Server Occupancy Inspections .	 
p.s played Rhianna this morning . I nearly crashed my car . devastating news .	 
I have my tickets to see in Puebla this Feb 12 . Can't wait !	 
Please excuse me , I don't mean to be rude . but tonight I'm stalking you . 
Late night tennis , then getting the house ready for the PARTY ! 
today wasn't worth waking up for .	 
The 2011 State of the Union Address Enhanced Version Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:28 58 look at 
yesterday the agreement thang	 
22 November 1894 Venice , Italy - Thought i'd take a holiday . well , compared to being in a war zone this will certainly be a holiday .	 
Varsity vs Jv tomorrow 
Think I'll wear this tonight  
Vampire Diaries comes back into my life tonight ! Stefan and Damon and Jeremy . Oh my ! 	 
Due to the snow , all Philly schools are closed again tomorrow .	 
Can't wait to do service ! Today 's service is buffet !	 
You guys fucking rocked tonight . Thanks for making our trip totally worth it . Thank you so much .	 
I love u and so excited fr Feb 11	 
I really don't wanna go to school tomorrow - . - ugh . Maybe another crazy snow storm will come tonight ? Haha .	 
I was thinking some small like bbq , but I'll hit u up sat to c wassup	 
Need to start figuring out options in for July August . Using loving it , but closed for summer . Ideas ?	 
there 's gonna be a lot of baby showers at the end of August/early September	 
better not have any " technical difficulties " tonight . LMAO 
50% through American Psycho according to my Kindle . If I could crank the rest out tonight that'd be awesome .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
What did you do ? Been researching Abilene , too , today . Lots of cool stuff to write about , so that should go smoothly .	 
Why does MSU have to be on tv tonight ? I've got to get a paper written ! 
Shake , rattle , and roll with Len Barnett 's percussion show this Saturday at Schimelpfenig Library ! Show begins at 2pm - open to all ages .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Another ver . I ran into a good friend of mine today by chance 	 
Matt Hardy is facing the TNA Champ tonight . I'm giving y'all warning that I will mark out in ways that will make Bieber fangirls look sane .	 
Tomorrow is school ! I can't wait 	 
LOL my toenail is Growing Back . By May imma be the shit !	 
Finished with my work out , day three , nice weather for it , 64 degrees in Okla today	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
At The Movies w the Fam- Police Man-came up to me- introduced himself- said he came to NC 4 1st time Christmas service in Colonie- LOVED IT !	 
The geeks at Game Stop think I'm retarded . Can't get any lower tonight .	 
Photo Got big news today . My mom found out that the small cancer they found on her is totally isolated and . 
" So since it 's no school what am I Doin tomorrow ?"	 
u that tired . not really . just being lazy . we only warmed up and did a few strides today so im not tired	 
i almost forgot that today was jers'dayyy	 
The One Year Anniversary Party is tonight ! 
How are you tonight ?	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Talked to First Alert , Lifeline , Life Alert today . Now I have more questions than answers ! 
He 's the happiest boy at all of Farrow night . 
I wonder what 's up with him . He might think you need an early night . he could still say " hi "	 
So whats on TV tonight doe ?	 
what you doin tonight ?	 
Been watching destination truth all day Whoo ! Love that show can't wait for the season premiere coming in march I think ?	 
so how u like that song he got a show for on FEB . 11 you show . .	 
Oakville 's Mary-Lu Zahalan graduated Wednesday from Liverpool Hope University with the world 's first Master 's degree in Th .	 
Following me . so she made my night 
Says the kid that tweets goodnight 9PM on a Saturday night .	 
Its all down to what the audience like on the night so never mind . Next stop worcester on sunday night	 
June 8th and by the way she said she had nothing for me  theyre so mean in there .	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
Worry never never added a day to my life ever - it just robs me of today brings me down	 
Get pork'd! Marin Sun Farms spit-roasted pork with rutabaga and nettle bread salad OR Spicy fennel chickpea stew with mint yogurt !	 
practicing at tilden tonight if anyone wants to join in . 4:30 to 6:30 .	 
for the first time we had a bride&groom visit us . So fun ! sound strange ? i mean a bride - as in she was married today .	 
Anyone on here who wants to come over after 6th period tomorrow can if you want to since you guys are already swimming over there anyway .	 
tell ASB to hit me . I'll try and book it for March .	 
it will be 65 tomorrow lol !	 
BAI . Gotta study for more test . thank god tomorrow is Friday .	 
going to fox n hound for a few , but generally having a low key evening . You ?	 
ok babes that 's cool me and the band will be there next Thursday	 
i was sleep for like 3/4 of history today . the final only took me 30 mins , and we was in there for 2 hrs . -_-	 
ACK ! Not fair ! I know what 's going down tonight HAVE to watch it I'm assuming the chat is on the TNT forum ?	 
Today i'm wearing te smile you left me with	 
7 months with my girlfriend today , OH SHIT . Just another month and it'll be longer than my relationship with 
good run today !	 
Follow me on Twitter for a chance to win an autographed copy of my new album ! - Give-Aways tonight at 9 .	 
the beginning and end of every great night !	 
wanna reach 80 followers TODAY :D Help me ?	 
Before u start to judge me , remember this , U don't know me , U don't know what I've been through . U have no idea what .	 
Today is 's 1 year anniversary ! We've been around for 365 days . Check out our giveaway to celebrate ! 
Off to sleep , am hoping tomorrow brings inspiration and solutions . Although even a glimmer of hope would be nice .	 
i wonda if i can get to 100 followers by tonite . help me out 
I have tweeted so much today , I just feel like twitter is my live blog . I partly blame .	 
you may not see it but i'm laughing inside muahahahah	 
heading out to LA tonite ,, it should be fun let 's go ?! Lol	 
Dirty Bit has played literally 15 times today 
We are giving away Creamer/Sugar sets on our FB page ! this message today for a chance to win one 
Evening news is where they begin with ' Good evening', and then proceed to tell you why it isn't.	 
My first experience with a pep rally today . Mother of God . I must have blocked this part of my middle school experience . Earplugs please ?	 
I can't wait to see yon on on show . Have a nice evening .!	 
All my twitter friends , join me in prayer for my friend 's precious grandmother who is having surgery tomorrow 
Good Morning , pajama party !	 
next friday or sat we need to plan something . This weekend going to visit my sister .	 
morning . really seungri won ?	 
Very excited about TV tonight ! 
im so glad to be back with the band ! practice on saturday !	 
Dang its alot of snow outside ! I Hope there no school tomorrow !	 
YUP ! I'm listening to Black Eyed Peas to get me in the groove for the party tonight . Will there be dancing ? Um . I think , " yes " 
have a lovely evening !	 
So ready for Friday !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports ar . 
Everybody likes a kidder , but nobody lends him mone y.I bet your using a 3rd party hosting 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Shadow Day tomorrow . ( Looking forward to it .	 
lets hangout saturday evening	 
Sarah Palin 's e-mails are coming out May 31 . No , THIS time they mean it ! 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
got in a workout this morning . gonna see some friends . get some rest . 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I missed Idol the other night . This story really moved me . 
morning  Have a grateful day .	 
had a proper carry on tonight with one of Englands future boxing stars , he nearly ended his career on twitter , lol	 
morning . Good luck .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
I miss your tan skin , your sweet smile , So good to me , so right And how you held me in your arms That September night	 
Mabel Davis session tonight . Possibility that I could take a few actual laps .	 
overbooked , there 's just no other way of looking at it - contact me after March 15	 
Those Things are Amazing ! But you may have to put a few extra hours in . =P	 
I have the most amazing boyfriend ever and i dont want anyone else but him , cant wait to see him tomorrow . Goodnight xoxo	 
She 's on Sirius - man - she is a C-U-Next-Tuesday !	 
Seems confirmed police pours gas on cars tonite so can blame violence on protestors and - 
Did you catch today ? Have questions about ask our 
new Archer tonight ! yes !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Today was a good day ! +	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
The snow is cool . It got me to work from home today . How about you ?	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying report . by 
thanks brother , I may need it . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
its a feel good friday on wave www.wave891.fm	 
Night . Best of luck , hun .	 
In my 2nd middle school basketball game , go NCA !	 
Who 's going to MAC world convention tomorrow ? 
Dunk Contest Marathon ? Damn it NBA TV , u knew I had shit to do today ! 	 
with nothing to do , I'm home alone ! and need to do several things for tomorrow !	 
good morning . Have a great day ahead	 
Hope today was successful ! ^D 
That nap was good and I woke up to the smell of smothered pork chops , today is goin great	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports a . 
the did numbers today	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
what have i done ? sweet jesus what have i done ? become a thief in the night , become a dog on the run	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
McEwen kept a stead lead after the 2nd end to win it in the 6th 9-4 against Matchett 
Organic gardening calendar for February In addition , feed with a granular organic fertilizer , such as Garden-Vi . .	 
i smell food , i swear i was pose to be talkin to tonight . UMMM BABE !	 
G'night. Day of meetings tomorrow in Harpenden	 
, I don't feel like getting up for school tomorrow	 
that was on last night !	 
Great show tonight . And imelda is so lovely	 
I can't wait for tonight and the 
lol u wanna lay that game ? I can ay that 1 all night 	 
goodnight from the UK , good afternoon in LA ! xxxxx	 
The song playing at o patio right now is B.G. - bling bling ; def a sign of a good night ahead 
Happy Anniversary to me ! My blog  turns 1 today . Readership really bloomed in the past few months . Thx !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Again too early for work u.u can't wait to sleep in tomorrow ! Woo ! :D happy friday n.n  
missed you last night ! Coffee soon poppet ? God knows I could do with one now .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
" we want the night "	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
I may flutter away occasionally but overall I'm here x	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Good try tonight bulldogs , I think Abel is looking forward to track .	 
Urban 's Wedding Concept Set to Launch in February 
today has be a long day	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
when i pass u in tomorrow . 
what i'm doing tomorrow .	 
Added a few albums for March ! Check them out =) - Anticipated Albums of 2011 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
I liked a YouTube video -- Fight Night Champion Video Preview 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
i went to take my 4th period exam today/i was suspended . its was dead tho a whole bunch of freshman .	 
Long weekend kicks off for most in about 4 hours , if you're going out on the harbour , Monday is looking sunny ! .	 
Keep pushing through . Joy comes in the morning .	 
WV bound tomorrow . Lookin ' forward to it 	 
Feel like working out again for the 2nd time today	 
slept thro morning class still feel like crap have only be able to consume soft food all day  in need of cuddles	 
Might put somethin cool together tonight . y'all invited .	 
keep spreading the news homie ! my 1st solo album " people hear what they see " available on this .	 
Totally excited for Nerd Night ! Tonight trying out a d&d board game Talisman cc 
Someone should call me tonight .! ~~ would you be blown if it was a dude ?	 
Be careful whose toes you step on today because they might be connected to the foot that kicks your ass tomorrow	 
Kobe Bryant named an All-Star starter for the 13th time . See the complete starting fives here . 
Night Gaby , sorry I missed you , sent you a mail !	 
There 's too much good tv on tonight !	 
oh , i work up here now , i go to work on the 9th	 
Good morning all 	 
Had a lovely day with Adam xx  Then enjoyed a yummy meal tonight ! All in all a good day .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
I tweeted so much this Morning i dont got nothin to Tweet about .	 
Fisher and Titans are negotiating terms of his departure . Might be firing , resignation or mutual parting . Could come as ea .	 
Just gt news my saturday gonna get burned . Sorry , , I dun tink I can make  
Ok . heard there is a snowball fight against all the car clubs tonight . thinkin about attending	 
And here is the write-up by the Guardian journalist after he survived the night 
got 10 " today but with nowhere to put it , it 's sucky . It stopped at like 8 am	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:20 48 PM	 
iono who they got voting . That nigga been out since november	 
Don't forget we are in the Clocktower Lounge TONiGHT ! Come pray !	 
Diabetes rises 9% from 2008 , CDC announced yesterday . Between 90 and 95% of diabetics have Type 2 diabetes . .	 
Local Author Nicole Cormier will be here at the library for a book signing February 3rd at 6:30 pm . 
wise words , good morning 
I decided I'm gonna visit the 407 tomorrow for a few days , see ya then 	 
is ready to watch and on SHORE tonight ! I can't wait to see Sami go home !	 
happened a few years back . No longer listed as 7th wonder . Replaced by bullshit on the list now	 
Follow me , Follow me , Obama called me yesterday and told Lisha follow me  lol	 
I have no homework . till tomorrow =)	 
IF YOU go to a Club tonite in the DMV you are desperado and your ass deserves to get stuck	 
mikey may be " busy "	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
What an incredible relaxing and inspiring afternoon . Thanks Reem , , and !	 
Okay . Whoever created this didn't even try to cover up that they did it the night before the meeting . 
:D and oh im going to be on tumblr all day tomorrow . :D school is again closed , due 2 power loss and the icy conditions ! yes !	 
free red bull night 	 
Glycerin soaps may be clear looking , but this doesn't mean they are natural , check out this company 's advertising 
Today 's is done . And yes it 's ANOTHER one of those 
Great Pyramid May Hold Two Hidden Chambers A 3-D simulation of the 4,500 -year-old structure suggests an ancient . h .	 
thanks just wish I did not have to go to work tomorrow .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Tomorrow we get to go on a scouting mission to Ikea -- not to buy , merely to price things out . Though I may splurge for swedish fish . YUM !	 
Off to bed now . agenda for Friday evening is still empty , so looking forward to grab a drink  somewhere 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
, ---- gentlemen , singing for you tonight was pure joy 3 3 3	 
Bonus PARTY TRUCK episode today . Recorded just forty minutes after the groundbreaking Power Hour . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
I was having breakfast and I turned on the TV . and Hurricanes and Suns was on ! Oh I have an awesome morning ! 
I remember you djing ., Mars , 2nd floor . Those were the days .	 
Confirmed Ru C.L will be joining Dizz 1 to warm up the stage for Mos Def this Sunday 30th January at Billboards . 
Hello Friday . You're the start of my long week .	 
Egypt internet disrupted , SMS down  AFP - Internet service was disrupted in Egypt early Friday as cel . 
The female may not be with you very much , but her affections are steadfast and you are always on her mind .	 
Taboo II tomorrow with my big cousins !	 
saturday . ignore vanessa shes obviously fucking mental	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Sunday well see what about the prosperity gospel is true and what 's straight up man made selfishness . It 's gonna be a grand time !	 
Livingston police log Jan . 26 , 2011 Following is the Jan . 26 Livingston Police Department activity log , as pro . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
yes , new tad tonight , yay !	 
Ignore my emails requesting a change and I will see you on Saturday , as planned , at 1:30 pm 	 
- Kansas state law requires pedestrians crossing the highways at night to wear tail lights .	 
Secure yourself extra monthly income with the help of affiliate online marketing . Start making good money today . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Ive always wanted to slam da door on a Jehovahs witness like Ice Cube did on " Friday "	 
Tonight come out to for 
Hello good morning .	 
for the night , knowing i have to deal with tonight , not liking it at all* 
we can't D maybe next saturday ? :D ill put it on my calendar too ^_____^	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
You want a new life , but you take the new one you get every morning for granted .	 
hehe Reeses+Herseys chocolate and more fisherman 's friend so i can get better for tomorrow night 	 
I have class tomorrow morning but should get to before 3pm	 
Smile Through It All releasing on iTunes tomorrow ! 	 
Tonight 's Special Seared tuna with olives , artichokes preserved lemons ! So delicious ! And LIVE jazz happening NOW ! 
I'm not sure I can hold out for three . I think I can manage two , though . I really want to start posting next Wednesday .	 
Follow 's twitter Q+A in tomorrow on or . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Egypt internet disrupted , SMS down \n \n AFP - Internet service was disrupted in Egypt early Friday as . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
o wait is the rumble this Sunday ?	 
Egypt internet disrupted , SMS down  AFP - Internet service was disrupted in Egypt early Friday as cel . 
Mad morning rush . Well it beats the tube .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Today 's history lesson 
okay im done w/ homework for the day . i'll finish it in the morning	 
is announcing their lineup on Tuesday ! 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Egypt internet disrupted , SMS down \n \n AFP - Internet service was disrupted in Egypt early Friday as . 
lol hell yea they play ohio state saturday finna get they ass banged lol	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
And today is another all nighter	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
You may not be where you wanna be , but thank God your not where you used to be . 3	 
Also ; They r hoping today 's actions will make people panic n be scared 4 their lives n decide not to go on the streets . stupid much ? 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
" It 's 3am in the morning ."	 
So excited . Have seen tonight 's episode of  four times now and still can't stop laughing . Amazing .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
i think imma get lost tonight . Jus take a random train nd see where it takes me	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Dang . something comes on today . What though ?	 
Another Thursday night karaoke ! Come sang some songs ! Click the link for tonights specials ! 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
lol . k . wat time is show time tonight ?	 
The location look idyllic too . Will have a good look tomorrow , thanks for the link .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
lol imma be at work I only be off monday - wednesday . my brotha can't ball !	 
my shoes ? Did I leave them ? Confused . Huh ? I may be missing actually . Still Confused !	 
The Dark Side of Chocolate and Child Slavery The darkish side of chocolate and child slavery . Today , what do th . 
Playing the warehouse tonight in la crosse , the site of the infamous headlining show !	 
and there is nothing to eat . . I hope tomorrow there will be something delicious made by my 
Very scary . Egyptians brace for Friday protests as internet , messaging disrupted 
u gone be high as hell tomorrow , tryna get yo wisdom teeth pulled !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
can the snow fairy say we have a snow day tomorrow ? thanks	 
golden sun bowling for soup . life could be worse .	 
Obsessively checking the USPS site for my shipment from even though it was only sent yesterday LOL	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
haha , yes it is . she leaked the lyrics today 
really good point ! i like that ! i think i'm in the boat that TODAY we should serve God faithfully and make the most of it	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
No more suspense VP tells Jim Lehrer President asked him last year to be on 2012 ticket ; he accepted tonite	 
someone should drive me to Disneyland right now . i wanna see underoath tonite	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
I PROMISE THAT will be released today within the nest 10 mins .	 
I thought Nicki video came on today ? 7:30 according to 
Covering the activities for today . A bit tipsy .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
friday is coming !	 
I don't intend on going uni , and NOTHING will change my mind , so tomorrow when everyone else starts their UCAS I do what exactly ? Hmmmmm	 
Uh oh . Omar 's coming . The power of twitter engagement/discussion DM me ur phone number . I will be calling you tomorrow .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
i my 1st job interview dis sat 	 
I only work until 430 so yea we could hang out ! I don't think I could wait until sat . seriously .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Excellent . has the same one as well . She got her 's today . So much better that the Samsung Moment  . A++	 
We'll have to do this in installments , it works wonders ! Night petal ! X	 
excited to get my blackberry back on tuesday !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
oh no ! Thought you'd be around tonight !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
it kind of grew on me i did not like it at 1st	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Good Morning friends ! 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
So if canada is airing collateral on Sunday does that mean it will be on the net ? 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
hello . my friend . how are you today ? Miss you . have a nice day	 
-- I'm impressed . After I get back from my art show at the Bellagio on Saturday , I'm working on Venetian plaster .	 
that 's what they did in December , but u think they might have to set them up earlier for Billeh .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
bout to do a freestyle with before I call it a night	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports a . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are . 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Need to make French localisation too . May swing Paris job .	 
like for your school or for the whole pg county ? No school tomorrow =) ))	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Cool ! My new NIKE Machspeed SQR-Fit Driver arrived today ! Now if the dang snow will hurry up and melt = 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Thinking of hiking Camelback Sunday AM ; haven't been up there in a while .	 
My friend called me just to tell me that his sub for night school is named Ms . Chronic lol omg he 's such a pot head	 
Happy 19th Birthday to my brother !  
great day today -- so nice to get off to a great start for a change	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love yous2	 
if most of my followers weren't tweeting about valentines day since like december , i woulda forgot about it lol	 
if i get my baddest chick cupcakes . u think it will be a fun night ? lol	 
Mother nature , I apologize for yelling at you yesterday . You are amazing . Love Lizzy , the girl whose midterms have been postponed . AGAIN . ( :	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
Nice meeting you today , if only for a minute .	 
Morning . lets work .  
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Living life like there 's no tomorrow	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Answer first thing tomorrow please . Can`t wait .	 
May go out this weekend to get new stuff . Sold stuff to a store . Got 25 dollars ! YaY !	 
Nothing beats an awesome night of ceilidh =) Thank you 
it was fun . I enjoyed it a lot . I would not mind going back on March .	 
yeah ! tomorrow !	 
double shift day -_____________- why must i do this sigh goodbye everyone i will be working from 6 to 6 see you in the morning	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
What are you doing today to let your loved one know what they mean to you ? 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
don't have any homework due tomorrow , so I finally had time to paint my nails .	 
what didn't i respond to ? lol sry i musta missed that , and ive been busy ! im at work now , be over tomorrow tho 	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming ou . 
Rock Coconut in tomorrow be there !	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports a . 
how do you see KITA remain relevant for benefit of Rakyat ? What are your plans ? Do KITA plan to be 3rd force as well ?	 
just cancel school tomorrow i don't see any point going to school on a Friday	 
Win 2 VIP tix to Hangout Fest , just " announcing their lineup on Tuesday " for a chance to win . [ via .	 
Club tonight . Everybody free all night . See you there ladies 	 
Actually , I intentionally left it on my keyboard as my carrot for tomorrow morning to get me in early ! I torture myself routinely .	 
Sunday , come sooner ?	 
no travis porter move tonight ? i thought u would go .	 
I can smell dirty scalp from across a block in NYC in August . It can cut through garbage build-up .	 
Wait on Tuesday they'll push it back a week .	 
Will be at Ultra tomorrow 5pm . Those who have kettlebells and already basic understanding of the lifts feel free . 
Off to basketball for the first time in awhile . I'm gonna be a sore bastard tomorrow	 
lol cuz you love the night life n you love to boogie	 
saw a turbocharged pickup today yu to 
Think I'll go to bed . Good night twitter 3 xxxxxxxxxxx	 
is gonna be at The MVMNT again tonight ! Invite your friends and get there at 8:00 !	 
I won't stay up 3 hours later to talk to you tonight , then .	 
Congratulations to the City of Snellville and their Police Department . Ribbon cutting at new PD offices today .	 
what are you guys wanna do today ? ^^	 
FEB 3 catch me on the highway headed further south . cant wait to get to TX so wish could go ugh that sucks !	 
UK Islamic poster campaign calls for the murder of Home Secretary Theresa May 
Time to hoop . Holla at ya during the C 's game tonight .	 
hey , are you doing any signing besides Bridgestone tomorrow ?	 
If we lose again tonight , consider it a rebuilding year . GO Green ! 
I had a late bloom of inspiration this evening got some good writing done on the new website . Now it 's time to sleep . Probably futile .	 
haha ,, today should I go along with u to CAUSEWAY check at popular ? XD	 
We are people of the night ?	 
tonight , im gonna be ya wonder woman 3	 
God woke you up this morning to see another day ! That 's more than enough to be " Thankful " for .  .	 
Come out and volunteer with tonight 6pm at 16th island !	 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
The clouds in the sky are pretty tonight  
I don't wanna sleep tonight , dreaming is just a waste of time	 
And I'm tuned into your station tonite . 
First person to Buffalo Wild Wings on South Broadway in Lexington . Tweet at us when you're outside For a free ticket to Feb .	 
I had to run errands after work today as well . Then I took a nap . Now I'm going to start , you know , doing stuff maybe . 	 
possible movie night . thoughts ? JUMPER of Major Payne ?	 
morning re search on my break .	 
Ebay offering for today A sexy cowgirl . 
" Believe it or not ." Song . Stuck . In . Head . Netflix on my tv makes it possible to watch The Greatest American Hero . All night .	 
I can hear foxes at it . Night night London	 
look forward to seeing unelected ind hopefuls each night , or is this wicklow , harvard kennedy guy getting special treatment ?	 
I hope I finish all my homework tonight ! D :	 
I got my copy of the The Blue Notebook today from the library AND Decoded .	 
Team Manitoba Headquarters Checkout today 's added profiles of Madison Bowey  
My wife did that today , but she got 32 outfits for the kids for $80 . Can't complain about that . 	 
maybe you should get warm and sweat off the calories you have consumed today . im predicting 3000	 
One may not agree with it but it is not quite the simplistic view people assume . British commentators often despise Gandhi .	 
Vodafone Egypt Remains Silent As Access Goes Down Ahead Of Friday Protests Some worrying reports are coming o . 
Exactly . Ill take flowers , chocolates , preferably items of monetary trade or value and you may be on your way . lol	 
sad , but so true As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
there 's no school tomorrow .	 
are you going to be at Iowa State March 5th ?! I'm hearing rumors ! Make my even better ! bring 
Can't wait ! Today was great . Tomorrow wil be better . Going to Legally Blonde w/some lady friends ! Almost 
Hello Friday . I'm going to fucking OWN your ass tomorrow .	 
Missed you too . And I'm sick and had to go to the doctors today 	 
The Bulldogs and Spartans are on the ice in preparation for the start of tonight 's game in Big Rapids .	 
Senate is currently in a quorum call No more roll call votes today	 
wrote this-put it in blog thanks- I will too- I'll be away this weekend so no on Fri or Sat night .	 
hells yes ! helicopter tour sat 1pm . 	 
Hilarious movie ! Bout to watch for the 1st time ! W/ 
so my boss told me to stay home from work today . im thinking the office was closed and it wasnt ! wtf ! ?!?!?!?	 
First exam tomorrow . Nervous .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
tomorrow I'm going to connect on Twitter at 3:00 pm , I will check the twitter tonight and tomorrow morning and I will send	 
[ Ask A Nurse ] Re Ferritin ?HI again , My Iron before treatment back in March was IRON 34  IRON % . 
Sat here watching Martin Fowler talk about Cannabis . Nice to see he 's fallen on his feet .	 
we may not have electricity but we have way more beautiful landmarks architecture and culture than america p.s Im your fan !	 
Asheville Game Jam kicks off this Friday , Jan . 28 The Asheville event closes at 5:30 Sunday with a festival at . 
i would love if it snows that thursday before my birthday so we can have friday , saturday , and sunday off 	 
I work on Saturday , 10-6 . I almost never work Sat , but I have to make up my hours from yesterday/Tues . Karaoke night tmrw with Elysia ! 	 
shoot my bad brotha . supa busy today . If you free Monday or early next week then can . I'm going have some music for u soon brotha	 
Uh-huh . You accomplish too much and have too clean a house for me to believe that . But I understand you may have a rep to protect .	 
Ok shall go bare face today .	 
lmbo not tomorrow tho 	 
trying to go snowboarding in this ski bunny look .	 
No one set a hashtag for the OCA conference ? It 's up to you , Joe . Gab there ? Can I join you for lunch on Sat ?	 
wing night some pitchers w/ 
Aye fuck this nigga Xavier I said wats up today at school and he shook my hand with one finger and said " your not worthy of the whole hand "	 
gotta go to fuckin whitney young to take this got damn selective enrollment test at 7:30 in the fuckin am saturday mornin	 
The School District has cancelled classes tomorrow , but SLA will open at 10am to attendees . Details to follow .	 
Some great games with the tonight . Good times . 
Tonight Physics professor Brian Greene explains how he searches for potential universes .	 
Good Morning " rise and shine " to all my Tweet-hearts . Make today the best and brightest " MP "	 
I've been looking at new book " Fall to Grace ." Today I discuss " Revolution of Self " 
Obama bipartisanship means you compromise . You lost in November . 
Jerry 's latest , greatest line . after Jazz lost 6th straight last night ." Sooner or later , you got to get tired of getting beat " Go J-Slo !	 
If you didn't get to see perform last night . Come to the Renaissance Hotel in next thursday 9pm FREE !	 
Do you trust her ? " Lol at the front page of the Herald Sun  "	 
sweeet , got out early . goodbye jan term . on monday , hello spring semester .	 
HA ! I had no idea it was his birthday . I did , however , listen to " California " and the Peeping Tom album today . Weird .	 
yes ! now i can have my sleep over tonight , and my orgy tomorrow . crying tears of joy , turns on some reaction and starts clapping*	 
It feels like I have allergies in the morning , is it allergy season yet ?	 
I think I may very well be dying . . . . from a lack of free stuff . HALP ! 3 
We are having so much fun with you in Telara that we have extended the Beta 5 event through Saturday morning at 10 a.m. PS .	 
cheers dude . It 's not as sore last night , so all should be sweet	 
Best Western Inn , Fort Worth - Stay 1 night and save 
Amped to see my favs n get " married " tonight	 
I had such a long stressful day work today , that I ate a burger for dinner ! Now I'm bloated . 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
It 's ur bday today ? No its tomorrow I . believe	 
Not feeling twitter today .	 
so so so bored right now .  i want tomorrow to hurry up and get here already	 
Taking a cab cross town today in NYC 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at . January 27 , 2011 , 5:29 pm	 
This is all in the time I sat down to tweet , I'm an animal .	 
thanks , its obvious today schools cant/wont stop problem kids . good parents need to protect their kids	 
It 's been a tiring week . I think I'm still recovering from Monday 's icky-sicky day .	 
Bailey will be at the vet until Saturday . Urinary tract infection turned to blockage . I thought he was gonna die . 
Cheap night skiing at Mtn . High 
" Take me to the place where you go , where nobody knows if it 's night or day ."	 
I have to renew February 20th ! D :	 
I know my calendar is off . I know the 30th is Monday but I know I need to mail the paperwork tomorrow or Saturday . 
Welcome to Egnyte ! I'm here to answer any questions or suggestions you may have , so let me know !	 
Is it February yet ? Im ready fa my Birthday smh . Miss me wit these slow ass days January !	 
I forgot something this morning  
damn we should have stayed longer ! stupid work in the morning and long drive home !	 
are too busy to write status updates this week , but we did rock Salinas CA on Tuesday night .	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
As I just discovered that someone cracked my wind shield today , I'm of the mindset that I hate people too .	 
Twitter is no fun in till 12:00 . 
it 's going to be 40 degrees on sunday at in Melbourne .	 
Get your iphone , ipod , and itouch app now ! My exclusive " my pink friday " app available now ! 
Welcome to Egnyte ! I'm here to answer any questions or suggestions you may have , so let me know !	 
I have to go you all have a good night c u tomorrow 4 my time 9 your time 	 
Thank You for signing my iPod ! It 's one of my most precious things ever ! And you looked Amazing tonight ILY !	 
keep Wednesday afternoon free k	 
I hope you get it tomorrow !	 
Miss May I - masses of a dying breed	 
met an amy anderson today but knew she wasn't - i was nice but in my mind i was saying , ' impostor '	 
Scored a couple tix for tomorrow night 's Dip Set reunion show . Thanks 
rule of any drunken night . If I don't remember doing it . it NEVER happened !	 
Tonight I feel fed up , You probably don't want to know that though . But there it is !	 
We have some good news to share tomorrow !	 
LOL ! You are probably right ! I will be in contact with you tomorrow . Thanks for everything !	 
where was I when you were following people ?! Lol . Do you wanna follow one more( ; p.s. Can't wait till feb 24th 3	 
Not much more than that so far , but he said he 's coming on Saturday ! I will tell you more if there 's more progression ! xx	 
gotta say some strong prayers tonight cuz i know the devil is trying to get the best of me !	 
Who 's going to watch the Blazers beat the Celtics tonight at the Rose Garden at 7:30 ? Go Blazers !	 
Bed time , night twits xx	 
Reggie Bush ' Take the Money and Run ' Night with the New Orleans Saints 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
Something really weird happened to me today .	 
Wishing I had a quad-core iMac or Mac Pro today . I don't want to wait 45 minutes to render 2.5 minutes .	 
I wanna get to 600 followers tonite ,, but I dont want the dead ones that only follow for a day then piss off x	 
picture hits tonight ! 
here , don't forget to come see at on 19-Feb , more at the blog 
Excited to hear OSU review of and present tonight !	 
C is shaping up to be pretty hot . not sure if I'll be awake long enough to finish D tonight 
Snow collapsed the skylight in our rehearsal room , so we're in the sanctuary tonight . Poulenc sounds great here ! 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
said it . impacts radio this Tuesday ! Everyone Request at your Local Ra .	 
but make sure cook tomorrow too cause I will be over that way lol	 
I'm good . today is ur first day back to work u shouldn't be bored u should be excited to work again .	 
At family fit night listening to the same 3 tweeny bop songs on repeat .  
January 27 is officially National Concierge Day ! A special thanks to all of our friends who send visitors our way ! 
I am dressing up as a sexy pikachu for my friends 20th apparently . Win ?	 
Loved 10 o clock live tonight , very funny and even worth the slow crawl out of the BBC and cold journey home ! Well done all .	 
Nah , lets just stay up and look at the internet , its way better at night anyway , all the nudie women come out .	 
That seems quite likely ! w tonight at the BT ! This show is gonna rock ! See you tonight !	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
" The Chaperone ," the new WWE Studios film starring Triple H , will have a very small theatrical release beginning on February 18 in AZ , CA , TX	 
Please excuse me I don't mean to be rude , but tonight I'm lovin you 	 
Nice , we almost have a full squad . I'm cutting April out so she can pay attention 
down* Well hello . How are you today Molly ? as she licks my face* I'm gonna say great !	 
You know what thursday means ! :]	 
A very productive day ! One song completed and another begun at the studio . Hope you're all doing well and having a nice evening !	 
I'm going out tonight and I'm not wearing a track jacket . Meep . 
because of you i've been smiling all night . i love it .	 
Told myself I wasnt going to drink tonight but i cannot refuse red wine at the salon .	 
Heading down to Dumfries tomorrow to shoot pilot . Looking forward to having the shit scared out of me by hungry vampires .	 
Today 's Most Read Stories 1/27 As another winter storm bears down on Southern New England , Eyewitness N . 
Should be ! a lot of friends supporting friends tonight . Its how our industry should be . A huge friendship	 
march i think . type ' grace pseudo video ' into youtube to hear the new single ! x	 
I'm doomed . I need to have it read by tomorrow . My parents sold my book and I didn't have a say in it at all .	 
I can't believe I forgot to tweet having dinner with Stone Cold last night . We had a blast . We ate , Drank and Laughed .	 
Jakarta , you are so friendly this morning	 
Site Update winter shop hours start feb . 1st 
Pope says atheists pick choose their morals . Today I will be frowning on child abuse not having a problem with h .	 
I'm going to be a nerd tonight and only do homework .	 
I could have sworn it was Friday . Oh well .	 
Surely you may as well let him settle in a ' nothing ' season ? Less pressure , learning the harder back end straight away .	 
" The Chaperone ," the new WWE Studios film starring Triple H , will have a very small theatrical release beginning on February 18 in AZ , CA , TX	 
Happy Friday everyone !	 
so it gets better after the 1st season ? We gave up . Eye rolling was causing vertigo .	 
did you go to class today ?	 
it 's mine and b-day today would really love it if you could make our day with a b-day tweet  xxx	 
Can't wait til july Miami with my besties imma be cutting up	 
-sits beside you and turns the radio up loud - know you never sang for me yesterday .	 
Okay night everybody ! PFC crazies . sweet dreams . xxx	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
Just realised I've been sat tweeting on my phone with my laptop open in front of me . oh Blackberry .	 
Almost time for Miah to be home - if he 's not staying late tonight . Turtle beach work tonight , too , hopefully !	 
Sat crying at Aaron and Jackson like a right sap ! 
in night school freezing my ass off , but listening to stress by justice makes everything so much better 3 	 
Happy Friday everyone !	 
can we pretend that airplanes in the night sky is like osama bin laden	 
I'm missing it tonight 
Cover 2 cover Brandy For The January Issue Of Kontrol Magazine Brandy and her alter ego Brand New , because we . 
Cover 2 cover Brandy For The January Issue Of Kontrol Magazine Brandy and her alter ego Brand New , because we . 
Much appreciation for the RTs/Mentions Have a great evening !	 
Its my birthday today i really want you to wish me a ! Pretty please 333	 
I watched takers on saturday . That movie was good . I hated that T.I. died at the end though .	 
Sometimes , i wish Justin wasnt famous . and lived in my town . and went . to my school . and came over . friday nigh .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
I should do my homework . Get it over with so I can enjoy my weekend . I cant wait till monday ! HEAVEN ! 33333	 
School closed tomorrow ! Goodness I LOVE being a teacher ! =all schools ?	 
Hey babe . As of today you have 1,230 downloads between all of your wallpapers . 	 
' s tomorrow !	 
I'm bringing that iPod tomorrow	 
Happy Friday everyone !	 
Totally disappointed in the change to Feb 4th on . Can you send two thumbs DOWN to the exec who decided this ?	 
We are excited to announce that we'll be releasing our third record , Simple Math , on May 10 , 2011 Sweet grad present !	 
I'll pass through tomorrow but hopefully will be there for sure Sat . 
thanks babe . i go for a ct scan on wed . been putting it off for 6 months so its about time i just do it . xoxoxo	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Receive text this morning ' Friday fail . Mistook nail polish remover for mouth wash .' LOVE my friends	 
Yay for having tomorrow off from school .	 
1st rule of Wall St ., if there 's a problem , it 's a sure bet $MER is waist deep in it . 	 
gonna give perfect couples another go tonight . wasnt too impressed last time .	 
Watching last night 's Colbert Report and vidding before my shows start 8 =)	 
So , instant noodles has never smelled so good before . Yeah . college life . Especially after your night class .	 
nope , but based on past experience apple keen to release new product every year . For iphone , it 's around June-Aug .	 
Minor Night = $$$ won't ever touch Tank 's but that 's a road we won't go down again 
Meant to mention this last night The simul-flop by Manu and Raja Bell was one for the ages . Here 's the vid .	 
I need to do something tonite . - isis free all nite	 
New member pinning tonight ! Be there at 9:15 in your whites . Remember no make-up or jewelry ( :	 
Yes poor dear got stuck in the tunnel . but finally made the awards . I stayed on that flow of tweets last night . Anything new ?	 
LMAO , come i miss u ! what u doing tomorrow ?	 
600th post today thank you for pointing that out .	 
Ima two hours of extra sleep tonight	 
hey man . me , chuck , and trav are going to be in DC on Feb 10-11 for the Linkin Park concert . You gonna be around that area ?	 
this if you watched on last night like i did . .	 
Morning of I was on way to have Radial keratotomy . Heard on radio and cried ! Just a sick feeling in pit of stomach .	 
I may be looking at the anagram maker again .	 
STILL not through with thrice-damned report . Thought I had it , but no . SO tired of this . I had places to go this afternoon/evening .	 
told last night my CDMA BlackBerry days were over . Oops !	 
night  looking round a uni in guildford tomorrow . pretty excited ! It looks awesome :D	 
When I feel what I feel sometimes its hard to tell yu so . yu may not be in the mood to learn what yu think yu know	 
, i love you u babe ! i want u in my room 2 spend the night together , together in my room !	 
Screwdrivers all night yum	 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
I hate people who indirectly tweet me . like that bitch from yesterday . If your gonna say something . tweet me . dammit	 
Think they said he stopped working there 4 years ago . May have been sick I wonder what happened . .	 
The CW just ruined my week by not airing the new Supernatural this Friday . 
Meditation changes brain structure study Results of a study that will be published in the January 30 th issue . 
Good morning from Anantara in the Maldives - happy Friday everyone and have a great weekend ! 
frag zombies next weekend ! Feb 6	 
already only blazing with y'all tmrw Friday bong rips ?	 
leads 22-16 with 6:30 left in 1st half . James Johnson has 14 points .	 
This Sunday and will be performing at Cloud IX in Atlanta - doors open at 9pm - BE THERE !	 
Visit Lash Girl to see today 's fun DIY project ! 
I don't come home till July TRACK	 
It 's only a Thursday . Imagine what this kid buys on the weekends ! 
A Phoenix Suns dunker ended up dunking himself last night . Pretty impressive  
 what are you doing friday night ?	 
We may have a reputation of being crazy , but trust me when i say We Dont Bite haha , and even when we do its .	 
yeah , I was there today .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Going gambling tonite with my peoples I hope I come back with some bands	 
Best get to sleep colege tomorrow . " street ballet " class first thing hahaaa	 
Watched the Millionaire Matchmaker today . There was a guy on there that looked just like . It was weird .	 
Well done tonight on 
Would like to call but her phone went for a swim this morning ! Lmao	 
oh woww they closed school for tomorrow to ? another day off from work but still get paid 
The meeting schedule for the week of January 31st has been updated 
I will get there late tomorrow . I have rehearsal until 7	 
conversation has been the BEST part of my day today . Thanks for making me laugh !	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
We are going to get in tonight with BKS live on www.theleaguedjs.com , www.stickam.com/theleaguedjs 9pm ET BE THERE !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
cant believe the science exam is 11 pages tomorrow - . -	 
New at Toy Shop Sale Little Tikes Cozy Coupe 30th Anniversary Car 
How many people have ever just sat down and read the dictionary ?	 
I'll ask the sun to shine , away from you ; so you can cry .	 
Went there on sunday haha	 
Its do beautiful today on lala land ! Its move to be home .	 
Today in 1945 , the Soviet army reached Auschwitz liberated 7,600 prisoners who survived the Holocaust .	 
MORNING !  migraine visited me again . 	 
Friday is just a wonderful day !	 
Cracking night speed networking in Brighton . Can highly recommend it for any one looking to generate more business .	 
Club tonight . Everybody free all night . See you there ladies 	 
Birthday today ! pretty good weather and uploading a new video this weekend 	 
my life January 26 and 27 
no problem ! Hope your head feels better ! I had one last night ! Hate them ! 	 
Jus got out the shower gettin ready fo a long night	 
I got the smaller one just for you and ate half of my fries/onion ring combo ) besides doesn't start til Sunday .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
There 's plenty of miserable sods on here tonight	 
Egypt Protests LIVE Updates Major Demonstrations Planned For Friday 
Only got 2 hours of sleep last night . I love my bed so much right now .	 
Today 's Find your favorite running song on Youtube , or Last . fm and post it to your profile . If I am . 
haha didn't you get lots of ' night back 's ' ? 	 
logo em remembering sunday ! 1111	 
- hey Rahul . Could u email me the time schedule for Feb 18-19 ? Also , u using twubs.com for interaction during sessions ? Thanks !	 
can't wait for video tonight  
Beloved of the Fallen book giveaway contest on till Jan . 31 . . Tell me about the " fallen angel " in your life .	 
is filling an order for vanilla cupcakes and then I'm making and decorating a fondant cake as practice . Is it obvious that I'm off tomorrow ?	 
I am all set with this snow and I would like my husband to come home . I am having a happy hour at my house tomorrow at least !	 
Check out the New update on the Verdugo  Art Show . Come Thru this sunday 
waow u went outlast night and didnt get me lol 
They always look for the easy way out . They may have gotten away with it before . But those days are long gone .	 
When i get older i wanna wake up with two girls every morning lol	 
Sitting in the sun room of joy . About to dig into my crit partner 's comments . 
HE 's better off doing that anyways . avoid having a 9th freaking kid !	 
A Year Without Rain  was released today in Japan !	 
Does anything special come on tonight on tv ?	 
Hey , here is my set from Conan last night 
Hi Twitter . Not much tweeting today . Too much work to do before the weekend .	 
thinks that i should pay her cause she 's gotten undressed so many times today	 
You didnt text me today ? Thats a miracle !	 
' He walks the night'? You've got to be kidding me .	 
getting on tonight , you know I will check em out ! 
I'm thinking brick house tonight	 
3:30 a.m. EST . I'll have to pass on this one because I have an exam tomorrow morning .	 
Goin bowling tonight hell yes !	 
when in March ? Birthday is the 26th , but let us know if we can get a track or two sometime .	 
It 's done ! Sorted . Dozens of papers are sitting on my desk with scribbles over them . Tomorrow I'll put them away . Now goodnight . 
-______- we need to take a drive tomorrow an Starbucks	 
30 tomorrow ! I am so excited . If the past 29 yrs are a hint of what is to come I've got a lot to look forward to .	 
Today wasn't as good as it was yesterday ./	 
For one of the few times in his career , Steve Johnson has enjoyed a full pre-season . Looked in great nick at training today .	 
It 's so much easier to accomplish things when everything around you is in its place - that 's why I'm cleaning the whole house tonight !	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
it may not mean nothing to yall but understand nothing was done for me	 
Can it be March ? So , so , so excited to see with in NYC !	 
my dtr is being such a witch ! complaining she cant have a " big " b-day party this yr . mom dad have a 1st holy communion to pay for boo ! $$$	 
oh that 's good hun 
WTF y do randoms follow me ? n.e ways . morning everyone :D	 
I've made a gin coffee on college before , it 's surprisingly wonderful . Even more so at 10 in the morning .	 
Live chat about lessons 1-3 tonight after 
No baby to night so goodnight !	 
is shattered ! good night .	 
so i feel like i didnt get anything done today other then going to work .	 
One final plug for now , this evening 's article on Twitter and the powerful machine it has become - 
I am going to sleep . I hope to wake tomorrow with a Free 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
and big game today . big game today . you are so close . haha	 
Eugene is absolutely gorgeous today ! I love it	 
So , which side are they going to be bad for ?  Okay , okay , I am waiting till tomorrow . I just hope they don't destroy EL .	 
Are there any plans for a Corre t-shirt ? . watch smackdown tomorrow night	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
ya know what , if we go just 4 more weeks without any more snow , this may be the worst of winter 2011 ! keep thinking spring kids !	 
Performances start tomorrow ! Come see us and our birds perform live in Corbin , Kentucky all weekend long ! 
funny thing I had a really serious important twitter rant prepared for tonight , completely forgot it	 
Good Afternoon . What 's the haps ?	 
good run today !	 
Yo ! Are you coming to the thingy tomorrow ?	 
April 16 is the date to watch out for .	 
Oakland leading 17-16 with 10:16 rem . 1st half . Kampe just had his first outburst at home in a while . Unhappy with shot selection .	 
glad im done cookin . ain cookin shit else til march 
I worked from 5 pm to 4 am last night and 4 to 12 tonight	 
I blame the TV schedule tonight . I would have gone at 10 , but 10 is when the 10 o'clock show came on  then I had	 
night 2 of having a lunchable for dinner . 
Yesterday day boys carried me and to da car once we fell asleep after da movie	 
Aah such a familiar feeling . Still waiting for those elves ! Have a good night .	 
Keep God 1st and he'll continue to open doors , and eventually he'll hand over the keys to success	 
meh . the recommended briefs are pretty boring from what i can see compared to the others . gonna go in tomorrow and talk to jo	 
Any of my friends here excited for the flames night next month ? Which flames member would you like to see in either video form or in person ?	 
Awesome isn't it . Seeing them live on 6th Feb . Can't wait !	 
im tryna get everything down wit it now , but february for sure	 
Good evening , you model employee , you ! 	 
I'd love a nap , but I'll never sleep tonight if I do .	 
Ahh ! Why can I never have a good night out . I need to cry !	 
take them to wimbledon wetherspoons = its still panto season and they may met Jerry Springer .	 
Definitely forgot it was my homey 's release party tonight . Um.who 's trying to go to the Lounge Minneapolis this evening ? LOL .	 
I saw " Children of Men " for the first time today , and suddenly feel the strong urge to reproduce eventually . BUT MANY YEARS IN THE FUTURE .	 
. i wanna get 100 followers by tonight if i get that , i will be the happiest person eva .	 
took a stroll through the snow today .  . " hold fast to dreams , for if dreams die , life is a broken-winged . .	 
someone asked me today what my dream was . they were shocked when i didnt say " hug " i actually wanna see a .	 
Today Storytelling workshop from 830-11 , Business Brainstorming from 1-4pm , Dress up in drag and prance around in rehearsals 6-10pm	 
Good morning ! TGIF ! I'm going to go to a lesson tonight ! Yay ! Have a good Friday !	 
Coming Feb 2 mixed feelings about Mint 's on Austin Street .	 
shit bruh my phone is off till tomorrow i hope my dude whats good tho bludd how was the 007 shoot	 
I wear my sunglasses night so I can so I can .	 
Want a chance 2 win a 2 night stay dinner for 2 ? Tag yourself at !	 
you got my text earlier today ? LOOL .	 
haha that 's ok I have work too . nighty night ' lovely friend ' haha . Speak soon 
drinking right now , enjoying an early weekend . I'm buying drinks in tonight for my sexy friends only .	 
Jersey shore tonight at 10 lol Mariel keeps reminding me sheesh	 
So glad I got the chance to hear Victoria George live yesterday Hotel Utah	 
Also , when I said five day weekend , I really meant four and a half cause we had early release yesterday but whatever	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
thank you love . ill get ahold of you tomorrow .	 
It stopped snowing this morning . Although I've heard it was s'posed to snow again sometime . soon . Tomorrow or something . |	 
I know that we are young , and I know that you may love me	 
I'm at nyma , the new york manhattan hotel  
at wat time exactly is Moment 4 Life vid coming out tonight ?	 
here comes the pain here comes me wishing things had never changed and he was right here in my arms tonight but here comes goodbye :' (	 
delayed opening tomorrow , they did it so everyone could stay up for jersey shore	 
is the MAC Pink Friday lipstick ever coming back ? I'm running out ! = (	 
I'll send something tomorrow G , what you lookin for ?	 
Glenn Dale woman critical after house fire ; 4 PG fires last night linked to power outages . 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love yous2s2	 
Nobody can go back and start a new beginning , but anyone can start today and make a new ending	 
The King 's Speech looks quite good , between that and Black Swan , Jan will be good for movies !	 
:D What you been doing today part from getting laid haha 	 
but it 's gonna be back to the norm tomorrow !	 
Good morning guys ! lets make a sale today !	 
68 during the day and 60 at night .  
Taylor Swift is coming to Edmonton in August . I AM SO THERE !	 
Yesterday we said we had some good news and here it is We got 20 more to give away . 28 TOTAL ! 
If you didn't get to see perform last night . Come to the Renaissance Hotel in next thursday .	 
Uhm where the hell is this bitch suppose to called me last night .	 
because theres a strong possibility she would got a stapler thrown at her back if tomorrow was a full day .	 
Delayed opening tomorrow . how is this great ? I still have to go to fucking school .	 
Nessari says hi !  saw him today .	 
me too ! I will die if there is school tomorrow !	 
Lawmakers introduce bills that target 14th amendment affect so-called ' anchor babies ' - reports 
No more suspense VP tells Jim Lehrer President asked him last year to be on 2012 ticket ; he accepted .	 
How many people have ever just sat down and read the dictionary ?	 
Arg ! What an uninspiring day today .	 
today was pretty easy . still sore though	 
just saw the interview KCCI did on James Johnson and can't wait to see him play tomorrow at the Well .	 
I don't fancy watching this Panorama about the creepy stalker , so I am retreating to bed . Night everybody !	 
may sometimes withdraw into themselves if their desire for superiority is contested .	 
you may not feel love but indeed you are !	 
50% off Xbox 360 games at Incredible Connection tomorrow only ! 
New tonight ! Chevy gets in a toilet !	 
Evening hun , I am okay . How was your day ?	 
is so bored im gonna do a follow friday , so prepare to see your name anytime soon .	 
Tomorrow is a defining moment in Egypt 's modern history . Everything is on the line . Make sure the  
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
I swear I saw Jonny Greenwood or at least his twin in Powell Dining Hall today at AU .	 
On phones today , I had to call someone named Angela Asparagus . I wonder if her pee is always bright yellow .	 
No school tomorrow :D	 
2 yrs ago i did this in Feb . Turns out it 's is the hardest month for me not to have a drink though . Good luck .	 
foot surgery tomorrow ! needs to be done but will hate being off the old hoof for 8 weeks	 
haha well that just sucks haha i think i might come down there saturday	 
The Milano/SEABONE undersea cable appears to be intact . However the connection appears to have been pulled by TE Data . .	 
Good morning everyone  still hasn't replied to any of my tweets yet !  I'm feeling sad already .	 
This was selling dutch girl donuts today . mmmm	 
This is morning . A beautiful things are waiting . GET OVER IT , get your ass up and works for ALLAH 's BLESS . So ., Morning everyone .	 
good morning Harada-san , could you post some art of King or Armor King ?	 
Blue Sky Cellar at is opening to the media tonight w/ a Little Mermaid ride update . More to come soon . 
in Warsaw you stay at my home , it 's obvious , in Gdynia - girls started to look for something today already for us all 8 )	 
in Warsaw you stay at my home , it 's obvious , in Gdynia - girls started to look for something today already for us all 8 )	 
may i ask why ?	 
The Escape Artist by August Burns Red 
dear , u knw that SHINee coming on 2nd april ? u going ?	 
i shoulda just slept through til tomorrow morning .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Some of the swimmers are at the game tonight . A few are trying to start the wave . By themselves .	 
Is an AMAZING band ! Check them out ! They are coming to Youth Alive in April ! !	 
bottles of champagne , lotta sour inspiration ~ march 29 , tgod	 
I will be in DM only for the remainder of the evening . 
On your way home tonight hug a thug - 
Great Cause for great rescue ! Please help . Feb 25-27 . 50% of profit on ALL sales will go to 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
I'm a check it out tonite	 
Finally seeing . If it 's anything like tweets , I'll be up all night .	 
what ? I saw you today .	 
Good night sweetie - talk to u tomorrow !	 
As much as men may deny it . Men so much need to be needed .	 
seen her Tuesday naw , you ? nope i aint talked to her since like last week	 
1.5 yrs . Warranty is dead . I just need to make it till June . or try that crafty maneuver you used .	 
Fuck balls ! What 's on the boob tube tonight ? Or maybe ill go see Grammatical B at Bar Pink .	 
Think you have a fast or slow metabolism ? It may impact your diet more than you think ! Find out the secrets here ! - ad	 
We make war that we may live in peace . ~ Aristotle 
lmao where u at tonight ?	 
March 29th but until then go watch ' s new video ft . Too Short .	 
Talk Tonight At The Fillmore In Charlotte , NC Well as all my locals know Girl Talk is play . .	 
Seriously ?! bedtime night love you xx	 
it goes morning , afternoon , then evening	 
Hoping to see some celebrities at the PBA finals tonight and on Sunday .	 
All Archdiocesan schools in the City of Philadelphia will be closed Friday , Jan . 28 !	 
Last night , Googling boing boing api got you no relevant hits . Not any more 
Got my  All I have to do in the morning is pay $200 and I'll have my car !  
Good Morning  have a great day ahead ! 	 
needs to hurry up n be friday	 
I watched Superman fly away , you've got a busy day today .	 
haha I can't put my thoughts together to write a coherent paper . Maybe I should just put this off for the night .	 
set your sights straight now , don't forget pain . drink til tomorrow becomes yesterday	 
We are going to get in tonight with BKS live on www.theleaguedjs.com , www.stickam.com/theleaguedjs 9pm ET BE THERE !	 
it may take days , weeks , months or even years . but EVERYONE shows their true colors in the end	 
with speaking ! It'll be a great night !	 
Jeff Fisher out as Tennessee Titans coach after 17 seasons Jeff Fisher , the longest tenured coach in the league , may soon be parting .	 
Miss me with the bullshit tonight	 
I have a family ! It may not be the best . but I got on e.U just watch what the Lord is gonna do .	 
You - Below is a special message for ONE members from David Lane written on Friday , January 21st It 's a b .	 
but I know I'll have to come to terms when I'm awake End of May	 
I hope u make it home for the game we play the Knicks tonight	 
That awkward moment when you walk out of your room naked and remember its Thursday and the cleaning ladys is over	 
Hi ! I've been ok , hanging in there ! Have my days!Anyway,It 's been cold here for FL . It got to 20 degrees at night a few x's!Warms up	 
I'm good tomorrow 's Friday . I have a question u might can answer me and my co workers were talking about	 
Finished logistics 4 tomorrow 's shipments , from fulfillment center . 40 boxes going out tomorrow . That 's a pretty big order 4 us in 1 day .	 
i wonder what the egyptian govt will do during friday 's march in the name of stability-the-us-said-so . 
getting tomorrow and if so , what 's the platform of choice ? or ?	 
Will do ! BTW , I'm going to call C&B outlet tomorrow with our preferred bed frames -- fingers crossed one comes in !	 
dang coach j said tonight in his text good looking tho	 
First 100 ppl with paid tix 4 Saturday 's show get a FREE can of -- c'mon it 's on a sa .	 
Nothing on tv omg going to c tron again tomorrow I'm so happy	 
Pizza and a movie with the family ! another snow day tomorrow ! ;	 
Big match-up tonight in Carver-Hawkeye , No . 21 ranked Iowa Women 's Basketball takes on No . 11 Michigan State . Looking forward to a good game	 
Tonight Crab Crawfish Etouffee topped with fried soft shell crab - so good !	 
does Yao out mean that Bynum starts as 2nd placed in vote , or is it a coaches decision who replaces Yao ?	 
Cool just found out my Chem midterm is tomorrow ^	 
Working out by myself tonight  hubby is working but he 's keeping the boy .	 
Omg I would have to run into that skank tonight	 
If you come to Mon berri on Bloor in next 10 min I will give you a coupon for 2 free small frozen yogurts . Just gave one to uni students	 
Uptown bound to pack a carry on shower eat quick jointing thn on to Reggae night	 
someone is gonna go numb downstairs tryna go from sun down to sun up . 
and sometime in feb yup I shud b able to but I'm going Amsterdam 17-20th =D	 
thanks ! i hope one day you get to see it :D 333 and I'm in 9th , you ? :D	 
Snow Day Today was a snow day . For Fiona , it meant no school . For Kim , it meant working from home , as well a . 
Good night people .!	 
so as NYC yay ! This just in NJ snow tomorrow ! Not alot but still annoying . If we get 9/10 of an inch more snow=most snow EVER	 
GREAT executive summary of today 's seminar with . via 
I start my bootcamp class Mon  I need a new ipod , new running shoes , so right now imma bum working out !	 
I guess I'll do the video tomorrow then	 
Had a math test , today and got a 100 . Is it me , or is everyday just coming up ? Seems that way . 	 
okay , i will tomorrow gorgeous 3 going to sleep  love u xxx	 
I hope you can swim cause tonight i'ma get you wettt	 
Gene Mutation May Protect Blacks From Heart Disease  
Macworld trade show opens its doors for 2nd year without Apple ; some vendors betting on iPad 2 - Minneapolis Sta . ht .	 
Canfield believe were staging the show on Monday !	 
I literally want it to be sunday right now . Like , no joke .	 
what you doing tonight	 
So stoked for tonight ! will be the highlight of my day . and believe me , i had a pretty good day  
The sun is slowly startin to come out 
I have a feeling that we're gonna have skool tomorrow =/	 
Since will be live at Brooklyn Bowl with J-Live Feb 1st hear newest single .	 
Oh I will ;] Seeing him Friday !	 
You may be right , but if only I can sleep and be up early tomorrow . id go with the ' go to bed earlier ' option	 
YES ma'am.  IT ruins a lot of my Friday plans , but school is WAY more important to me . haha .	 
No school tomorrow :D	 
So it 's all right . I , Amy , kendall heading towards Vegas tomorrow !	 
There are over 1.2 million people employed in the weaving trade in Iran today . 
Answer NO ! I've been out of internet and heat since 6 yesterday . IT'S BEEN 24 hours of GROSS ! But all is well now .	 
your right society today SCREAMS justice . Example Jersey Shore .	 
Also . win a Trip for 2 to Florida for Spring Break ! We know you know where to go tonight ~ we just like giving . 
I gave blood last thursday , I go every 12 weeks  i know someone needs it more than I ! xXx	 
google you are crap tonight !	 
going 2 bed now , good night  	 
we was gonna see if we can record that shit tonight , that and Gangstas 	 
:D Yay !  Official high in today .  
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Was planning to do a pop culture roundup for tomorrow 's return . Currently have no will to do it .	 
Q&A What did the Buffalo Bills trade to the Dallas Cowboys for the 2nd round pick in the 2009 NFL draft ? 
Lovely French afternoon with my friend . There were indeed croissants , cheeses , and various manly coffees . Nice French family too	 
I need food in the brain I need to read some textbooks and do notes tonight . Also my primetime shows are on tonight YES !	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Cant wait for the 6th	 
You are spinning awesome tunes tonight Parker 
Thank you for the early Hope you have a great Friday 	 
Screw sleep . Just give me GG , coke and some ice-cream and I'm good for the night .	 
-{[Offline]}- as far as i know , i wont be home saturday . 	 
man looking good in that dress today . !	 
lol don't let'em run u off mar .	 
We , Pet Detectives and Rescue Fund were able to save another dog yesterday . YEAH !	 
Been browsing online lately can't wait to go shopping after I handle household things 1st ! Who 's coming with me ?!	 
I miss furiously refreshing teletext at 4 in the morning waiting for new digitiser to pop up .	 
Wind energy discussion tabled to February 
There 's only 3 pairs of tix left for ' s Fake Film Festival Gala tomorrow night ! Next chance to win before 6pm !	 
Homework . oh and i promisee yhu tomorrow i send clips x33	 
So what 's good with some white plains tonight	 
Got the hubby his man cave furniture today , next stop , living room the way I want it . Nice !	 
at 3:30 in the morning ? You're a hero . Period .	 
Oh yeah Charles Barkley and Kenny commentating the game tonight	 
we hope to send you the remix tomorrow ! .	 
Paused my movie . I gotta go to a special night getting of some Jesus .	 
Tonight is Roman 's  last night at the park . And I just moved close 
Have barely a few minutes on this as I am shattered . After win yesterday , I'm hoping praying for a ' win ' in Egypt tomorrow . 
ugh , im not looking forward to tomorrow night at all !	 
his 1st start bout time	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
Kevin Carrol of the EDL has been shot at by Islamic extremist in Luton tonight !	 
we stalk the night	 
BC the bitch ur being today is not the bish I started following	 
Check out ya boys from at my shoot today ! 
Made a little more complex and hilarious tonight as a women went on national telly and said women don't want equality .	 
whats on TV thursday nights ?	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Forget me . Forget it . Forget about everything we have done . I'm just not feeling happy this night . Sorry , can't help it .	 
Hi ! is true that you will be in mexico city on february ? I'M HOPELESS ! Please reply !	 
Thanks for the yummy sliders amazing green bean fries at today 's . Loved it !	 
It 's official The release date of my novel , em To Kill the Other /em , is March 1 , 2011 
Pretty good practice . Hope we're ready for Desert Oasis tomorrow .	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
tonight we're going hard 	 
nope you're avoiding me i may have to divorce you :/ /	 
That 's great ! Have a relaxng night-you deserve it .	 
who just texted me asking me what club I'm going to tonight ?.	 
2 mins into the 1st ep of UK season 5 it 's already light years better than the 1st 2 eps of the US version of the show .	 
receiving an academic letter award tonight . How exciting .	 
Great time today on with TL , Derick . These guys know how to make a person feel welcome .	 
Reasonably knackered so I'll head off to Bedfordshire . Particularly since I've to be up at fucking night time ARGH	 
Staying indoors reading 19th early 20th centuries 
This continues from the night before 's dream  Recap As we were kissing , he said always remember this dream  
explore your fantasies Tonight in Louisiana 
Vampire Diaries starts back up again tonight ! Check it out ! It 's gonna get interesting . 	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Stunning picture of protests in Egypt today . The Atlantic 
Gets a bit slow at this time of night so I put on a library CD , scroll back through the timeline and pretend I'm watching Pages From Twitter	 
Imagine if the invasion had never happened and today 's headlines read " Anti-government protests spread to Saddam Hussein .	 
I'll make it up tomorrow lol Aww sorry babe 
lol i already know . i just got the ad for it last night but now i gotta write 3 pages about it smh	 
love u . night xx	 
not yet not tour news yet I just heard march thru may	 
i've just turned 18 today as well ! You'd make me so hapy if you followed me ! xxxxx	 
Had to do a presentation on Tuesday for class that was peer marked- someone called me " Dr Kim " on the feedback . I like ! 
My heart goes out the those protesting in tomorrow may u all be safe . Viva La Revolucion ! .	 
Kevin Pietersen is hit by net loss  
let 's see a Sidney revenge tomorrow ok ? I'm cheering you for the final  best of luck 
Free jamba juice today  with 
Bartending the Silver Queen bar tonight . Going huge for 
Why hello night train . , how are you ?	 
Does anyone need 3/4th 's to an inch size plugs !? Let me know if you do !	 
Wow . Reports that has been cut off from the internets in preparation for protests 	 
Gosh . Drinking on a school night when I'm meant to be on detox . Clever idea Harpreet .	 
and Valentine nightmares on today . thanks for the questions ! 
SIMPSON SATURDAY This Saturday , I'm premiering an acoustic video of " Don't Cry Your Heart Out " at 
Great night at Proud Camden . The dandies rocked though unnerved by the high concentration of reality tv people in the room	 
Hi Jen . How are you doing tonight ?	 
LOL I was wondering what kinda fancy kitchen tool a ' river ' was . lol the Steve Jobs comment  What u making 1st w/ it ?	 
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
Extend my thanks to whomever was in this afternoon 's entertainment for a thoroughly delightful bullet festival .	 
started following you today . Coming home is such a great uplifting song . Love it .	 
agreed . but I'm going classic with the bird on sun logo .	 
today got to be the Thirstiest Thursday cause all I see is people meat ridin on my timeline	 
Get $50 in pizza gift cards Free TODAY ! 
As a you have a certain nonchalance about you , and some may even think you are disinterested in th .	 
She look like she been up all night with a nigga that wont wife her -___-	 
staying on campus to study for ochem quiz tomorrow . be home late	 
early in the morning and i feel like sleeping .	 
Also ; They r hoping today 's actions will make people panic n be scared 4 their lives n decide not to go on the streets . s .	 
No homework . Guess I'll just be studying tonight with 
Every Friday is like a miniature Last Day of school ! 	 
Reunion tonight . All is good in the world .	 
So tired today ;(	 
Who else b day around march 6th we trying to plan something	 
The NKOTBSB tour headline says " One Night , One Stage , Once in a Lifetime ," then lists 6 dates in 6 cities .	 
Ha , my whole piano lesson today was just chords . It was great . I'm learning " Days Of Elijah ." 	 
Amanda Holden proudly shows off her baby bump for the 1st time Next Generation Portable	 
I will be 28 in august	 
Before u start to judge me , remember this , U don't know me , U don't know what I've been through . U have no idea what .	 
Surprisingly , i wake up super early today . :D	 
Is Toronto getting the storms that we have in the Northeast . Close to 7 ft . of snow in the month of January . YIKES !	 
Making homemade chili for my jam session tonight with my pal 
if you are walking home tomorrow .	 
ah . blocked it out . May be good to just leave it that way .	 
I'll see how i feel in the morning . I'm hoping it 's just from shoveling/caffeine/withdrawal combo and not singular .	 
Aw . I was trying to figure out a way yo come  but THIS Saturday is impossible .	 
We had fun making podcasts today of our Prefix/Root/Suffix Word Creation activity . Will blog tomorrow the audio file .	 
Lol my mom is FORCING my sister to make a snow man tomorrow .	 
Imma fuck alexis tonight .  ha jk but i love my friends .	 
Today was one of the worst days of my life .	 
Enrollment for full-day kindergarten will begin Tues ., Feb . 22 , at all EVSC elementary schools . To enroll , children . 
The night is fading , heart is racing . Now just come and love me like we're gonna die .	 
It 's past midnight so the Blog Awards are now closed ! Barring some last minute twist , I've finished a very respectable 4th !	 
After seeing your match on Monday , I saw how your back bent and I don't know If anyone brought this  
crap . I meant ryne wester , wtf is wrong with me . I always get 1st and last names confused .	 
Tomorrow im gona order a nice pizza to myself myself to some heels for dis party on Saturday hope this snow doesnt fck my weekend up	 
wasted in that pic too bad I cant go out til may	 
I have a sore stomach !. it started last night .	 
My dad such a liar , he jus told my aunt in Florida he was shoveling 8 inches of snow today -___- lol	 
its hard to believe that its thursday	 
Your Auto Insurance Rates Are No Accident Drivers with accidents or moving violations on their record may face . 
c'mon, my code isn't bad 	 
Just followed . 2 of my favorite follows have RT'd her today . 
Your Auto Insurance Rates Are No Accident Drivers with accidents or moving violations on their record may face . 
this day was pretty chill today liking it soo far	 
Hanging with today after School was fuckin ' awesome . I hope he comes over tonight , he 's my family .	 
Going away dinner/drinks relocated to Zelda 's  on 21st bw N and O . Still at 7:30 , still a free for all !	 
We had a great day at the buy counter yesterday , come get the goodies before someone else does .	 
it 's mine and b-day today would really love it if you could make our day with a b-day tweet  xxx	 
whatever helps you sleep tonight	 
So . Never say never is only showing in theaters one day ? Bcs it says in the commercial " only showing February 11th ." o . o	 
well im off to bed tweets , night night xx	 
the mister is at class tonight , which means i'm fixing dinner for one , watching a girly movie and possibly reading some 	 
Are you doing the photo shoot tomorrow ? Do you have a tipped over van seat for to pose in ?)	 
You might need to run out tonight for more !	 
This may be a stupid question , lol but on the MediaBase website , I can only see the top 40 . :/ Why ?	 
I woke up today and felt like I was gonna accomplish something big . I think it 's happening now	 
I lost my new toy walrus at school today 	 
I stopped wearing those ugly ghetto so called " BRAND NAMES " back in 8th grade if you still wear them lol	 
so I am taking Nikki out for breakfast tomorrow you know your little 17 year old fan in the wheelchair gonna play	 
that 's bold , you should have it 5th hour with me dre .	 
Get ready ! has its soft opening tonight ! Absolut cocktails are complimentary from 9p-11p ! .	 
So is everybody going to watch a certain TV show tonight . hmm ?	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Saturday nights for the wives , fridays for the girlfriends .	 
Did u have fun today ? Have a safe trip .	 
Had endless fun today wheeling the trolley across zebra crossings , " outta de way bitches "	 
" i aint thinkin bout you tonight ."	 
Thanks for following . Will you join me for intl BPL  heel day 4.0 ? New movement Feb 14th . Leah	 
today i wished i had a bf who loved me to dig my car out of the snow . instead i put on my bib overall snow pants and used a tiny shovel .	 
Why do you care ?! Ugh . Having to memorize two paragraphs in one night isnt my idea of fun .	 
A glorious night . Thank you and I hope you make it into rehearsals tomorrow 
Wish it was tomorrow already	 
Is it just me or did Friday take an abnormally long time to get here !	 
try and make it March 30	 
If you do I'll watch it tomorrow as my Friday movie n-n	 
Egypt Protests LIVE Updates Major Demonstrations Planned For Friday 
i have a bit of a weird dream last night	 
Getting ready , then out for the night .	 
Netflix on my tv makes it possible to watch The Greatest American Hero . All night .	 
. but bad news could be coming tomorrow and it 's not necessarily health related . At least directly .	 
Check out circasurvive.com today ! 
same here . i feel upset tonight 	 
Seems confirmed police pours gas on cars tonite so can blame violence on protestors and .	 
The phone was ringing off the hook today . Three new projects brought into design today .	 
Can't wait for Jersey Shore tonight !; -) 
The producer of The Mel Robbins show contacted me this morning !	 
During ' confidentiality briefing ' bit of tonight it included " obviously people talk to their partners about things but we . .	 
I got a sting that can do some all pink croche braids for tomorrow for a lol	 
Crap , aircon not going to be fixed today , fan motor has burned out , the need to get owners permission to fix , he 's oseas WTF ?.	 
tomorrow I should be out of school early . ^^	 
just cancel school tomorrow i don't see any point going to school on a Friday	 
Still can't feel my cheek , but tired of waiting to see a surgeon , so I'm getting back on track to run a half in May . 
Just because someone hurt you yesterday doesn't mean you should start living life today in constant fear of being hurt to .	 
This may be the end of Julia 's reign .	 
will I be seeing u tonight	 
She should be executed by lethal injection i saw a girl wearin a G-Unit polo today .	 
The long awaited video from the Pepsi Max Crew launch yesterday including a quick interview with Greg Murphy . 
lets make January 27th a Tokio Hotel day because WeLoveTokioHotel	 
the 14th or later  so we're good	 
needs to get out this weekend and have some fun 	 
any one up for anything tonite ?http://yearbook.com/a/zdlrg	 
we too love our morning dose . 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Why I always realize I haven't done my homework to the next morning when it 's the middle of the night ? Fail . And there 's a lot to do . Fff .	 
I hate my neighborhood at night . Damn creepy .	 
The Night is young , I'm Blacking Out , but it 's been , fun .	 
Buying new sneakers tomorrow . If I'm gonna hit the gym my feet need new kicks !	 
Time to stop working and go to bed . I've got a leaving do to be awake for tomorrow night ! 	 
Carrie met Joey Fatone ! Now dinner@Rio , then ladies are off to Chippendale 's while the guys head to X-Burlesque before our last party night !	 
My parents don't like me that much . Figured that out today .	 
Purp Patron sound like a black mans to-do list when he skip church on Sunday .	 
That one drink after work turned into ten , tomorrow is going to be interesting	 
Sheriff , posse members launch 18th sweep focusing on illegal immigration [#phx ]	 
Photo Every february you be my valentine ~ 
Thing 's grown men shouldn't watch The making of comes on tonight . . I'll wait .	 
Toledo sewer repair schedule may be extended 
Okay , I can accept that . Better call me tomorrow , though ! finger*	 
long work day for you today but good job ! 3	 
the streets are clear , but the school aren't . the children might have no school tomorrow	 
People spell tomorrow wit a 's so much i startin to think i spell it wrong	 
You're going to regret this in the morning L Who 's John ? O_o	 
ALERT* I look really awesome with a mustache on tonight 's $#* ! My Dad Says . 	 
thats not bad in special needs land lol , but a long time in " normal " parenting land . I am promising myself a night out when	 
every morning you always make me mad fuck :	 
Great Australia Day race on Sydney Harbour - now pumped for Palm Beach to Whale Beach swim this Sunday - and only 4 weeks til Rotto !	 
Inviting and to show on Jan 29 at the robert ferst theatre . Tri-Cities alum will perform !	 
Use Your Chart-Drawing Skills to Win a Free Chrome Cr-48 Notebook Today Google announced that they are partnering with a 
you looked casually cute today :D 3	 
EVEN BETTER \8D/ . makes you wonder what they'll do with the 3rd if Six decides to go ahead with it .	 
lol I was just stating this I had me a good day and now imma have me a great night	 
I wish tomorrow could be the first day of SUMMER !	 
Wow . All my horoscopes were dead on point today .	 
It was great speaking at the Florida Chamber 's Insurance Summit today . Our shared vision will help keep money in pockets of Floridians .	 
At meeting . open mic night , learning about multicore development with . net	 
I checked in at Hell 's Kitchen  on 
so explain to me again why y'all are freaking out . Christian is in 2nd place and Chaz is in 12th whats the big deal ? 	 
So awesome we have 8,705 followers but how do we fit u all in the 350 cap . room for our local show tomorrow nite ? .	 
Tonight - Kem " everyone needs someone to talk to "	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Gotta do my a lil early . Got a busy evening tomm	 
I'm just gonna sit on tumblr all night and hope I do good on my Spanish exam tomorrow	 
tomorrow am feeling eating a small amount of lunch then on the alcohol , then i have an excuse to be emotional 	 
At Blockbuster tonight , asked " If I could have Batman Forever ?" The assistant said " No you'll have to bring it back tomorrow ."	 
i have class tonite . hopefully she does like all the other professors did this week by letting us go early BUT i heard that she 's " special ".	 
2 meltdowns at the nuclear plant today - one nuclear , one ice-cream cone . Both very sad but only one rocky road .	 
None of this makes sense to me , but GO BEARS . Scrum Axe Saturday on The Farm . 
My text inbox has been real dry today .	 
You're lebanese , you're orient . Whether life 's disabilities left you outcast , bullied , or teased . Rejoice and love yourself today .	 
Hope to see you tonight for the return of Romano . Then tomorrow night at BaySide for the reggae party of the year !	 
I'm so jealous that your are going to hong kong today  x	 
I'm down for any time ! on school days I'm out at 12:30 mon/wed and 11 tues/thur ! Just let me know when 3	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you !	 
the snow last night should be enough to put out the Miami Heat tonight at the Garden . 
You can make the sun shine even when the sky is grey	 
nicki minaj and drake song moment 4 life video comes on tonight at 7:54	 
Extra productive 1st part of night shift , glad but exhausted .	 
c'mon girl is that a question ? This is what I like to call 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
uh huh . i will prob just chill and go to bed early tonite it is just one of them days ya know	 
Getting ready to run . Refereeing some basketball tonight . Hope the games are good tonight .	 
No class + hot chocolate + Skins 5 premiere = Perfect Thursday afternoon .	 
Didn't have to work today and how did I spend my day ? Oh right , I slept until 5pm . So ridiculous . 
Disneyland is very not crowded this evening ! A beautiful night to come down and hang out !	 
Oh , I have NO doubt I will ! I plan on doing the PASTA CARBONARA for my family tomorrow 	 
Disneyland is very not crowded this evening ! A beautiful night to come down and hang out !	 
No school in tomorrow . They're closed .	 
Once in a habitat outside le UK . The other , late in the evening in a park in NW , years ago . Dunno where they hang out now 	 
We have a great " check in " deal starting on February 1st ! Keep locking for it !	 
Okay change of plans . What we doing tonight people ?	 
I am can't wait to watch Vampire Diaries tonight and Jersey Shore ! They look so good ! 	 
sounds almost word for word what Alan Jones said in Toowoomba this morning re Joe Hockey comment	 
I hope work fly by tomorrow . Yes I could feel it . $$ money $$ 
he walks the night	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Jersey Shore , Vampire Diaries , and Real Housewives of BH all on tonight ! Hope this night class gets out early !	 
I bet 50 bucks Sam Ron will get back together tonight .	 
My granny Connie died today . She was my best friend-hayley 's grandma . Keep everyone in your prayers for me . Ugh .	 
Night night , I need my beauty sleep - probably more than most !	 
and isn't it a GD shame that I actually think that and it just very well may be TRUE ?	 
I cheated . I had two appointments today that required me to look at a calendar . Can we still be friends ? Can I keep your sweater ?	 
a friend of Jon Watts told me as a " Fun Fact " when it came out today .	 
" Was good to see you on the morning news !" // tee hee . so early .	 
my nephew  made me listen to it all the time which is why I may have lesser feelings for him .	 
So we were sober on Tuesday Loves it .	 
S/O to the people that ate potato salad for breakfast this morning	 
Snowed in today  , back to school Tomo ;( . For now I'm watching Garfield on Netflix . Cool fat cat !	 
rest on limo the night 	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:21 36 PM	 
" I may hug people to hard and get lost in malls , but I'm not an idiot ." Via 
Workin ' like crazy on new update . Hope to release tomorrow . Stay tuned ! It 's gonna be AWESOME .	 
Name of ur 1st pet and 1st u lived on is how u come , up with pornstar name luv it	 
What do I want to make for dinner tonight ?	 
Choose your words carefully . They may come back to destroy you .	 
Tomorrow night I shall watch The Kings Speech .	 
oh thankyou dorm food for having cheese sticks , you totally ruined my diet today . - . - ;	 
Lol no one talks to my friends like that . You may be tight shit with ONE of my best friends , BUT that gives you no right to start shit .	 
Yesterday during a conference Sony announced a new portable console , called the NGP  It . 
Siblings may annoy you , but its hard not to love them .	 
me too  ! I can't use Twitter on my phone alot :/ . Still up for never say never Feb 11 :D !?	 
we forgot to get a picture today :/	 
Just updated to 1.1 . Good morning !	 
See you tomorrow ; 
made some old fashioned mac ' n ' cheese to nom nom today .	 
Got coffee ? Get a cozy ! = I am giving one away tonight . 
yump . Gotta get that money . 19.20 a hour for 8 hours on sat bro !	 
SAT IM HERE --- www.shampooonline.com on schedule for when the weather breaks	 
Did anybody else notice spell 's name wrong on the 6pm news tonight ? Maybe it was just me . but they did .	 
my shows are back on tonight ! nikita !	 
lol yea I just noticed it today .	 
being single doesnt mean you have to be alone . live life to the fullest , you might not know you're not gonna wake up in the morning .	 
Man Fuck Valentines day ! Im gonna be logged out of all social networks on Feb 14th ,	 
can't wait for tomorrow . get to see , steamin with my best friends , spooning at 's michaels out :D 
LA in february right ? Spring bring not til march . Idc where I just need to b somewhereN	 
Religion at center of custody fight CHICAGO , Jan . 27  -- A Chicago mother who has become an observant Has . 
Feeling good about today 	 
and im gonna be alright , and your gonna be alright . you aint gotta hold my hand , just walk with me tonight .	 
hey better air tomorrow coz for sure , you aint gonna like hunting your ass . 
Spinnin 's two-year anniversary tonight with , and !	 
Go north , young man , go north - Washington Times 
yepp ! they're having a concert tomorrow . of course i have work " /	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
i was thinking today how much i hate people who run outside when its freezing and theres snow on the ground .	 
So glad tomorrow is Friday	 
Good morning ! It 's a Friday loves it !  )	 
I remember you djing ., Mars , 2nd floor . Those were the days .	 
Tonight I seen somethin in ya that made me wanna get wit chaa	 
my hair was so tamed today !	 
What does NO do on Thursday nights ?	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Fuckin Dominos is takin my money tonight ! lol	 
N.J. mayor charged with insurance fraud ROSELLE , N.J. , Jan . 27  -- A New Jersey mayor who allegedly drove . 
Feel better Pressures on for Miami tonight Bulls are going to pass them for the standing if they lose  You hear that !	 
This is definitely going to be an early night .	 
. Can't type tonight ! 
12.30 Is an early night for me these days . Night all	 
just got in some awesome VINTAGE PROM Dresses ! Will be listing Friday and Saturday 3 
Pacific Cooler.don't tell the other flavors , bit you're my favorite Capri Sun . Don't 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
im not doin shit else tonight until i eat a .	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home f ." and got Part 4-Room five ! Try it 
check out some pics from last night performance in Newport News 
When the night comes , look at the sky . If you see a falling star , don't wonder why , just make a wish . Trust me ,  
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
you goin out tonight ?	 
mayo , celery chunks , and a side of cheddar Sun Chips !	 
We r too ! Thanks for putting together a great today ! Looking forward to the next one .	 
good night dears  i love you !	 
Great show tonight . And imelda is so lovely	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Walton of course . I listened to him over our guy on Friday night .	 
First night off in a while ! what should i do LA ?	 
All I can sat tonight is wow .	 
In Nov 2010 , voters expressed anger with govt ineffectiveness , not with Obama policies 
Fine , I guess . Still wishing January didn't have to leave . Can't turn back the hands of time .	 
Hey ! are you free tonight ? we're playing anderson fair at 8:30 ! i'm so excited !	 
Lose weight today with 
Please go subscribe to my friend ! We wanna hit 1000 subs together tonight ! www.youtube.com/user/caramellove09	 
Black Materia showed today . Looking forward to listening to it . May take the chance to write up a music review for the first time .	 
Metrobus strike is over . Buses on the road Monday . 
It feels like today is friday . or saturday . like the freakin weekend = ? hmm	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
happy about the new movie coming out in may ?	 
 (( You are just slaying me today !	 
Confession I couldn't get the El DeBarge song Who 's Johnny ? out of my head yesterday . I kept teetering between taking m .	 
I may sound dirty but idc I'm SO EXCITED to take a shower :D lolll	 
Today will nit be a good day , I can tell 
We may drive each other crazy but my family is the best	 
You may answer ONCE on Facebook AND ONCE on Twitter , but your answers must be the same .	 
so much it won't air outside the US 1st . Remember the Beacon video thing wasn't opened for International fans !	 
Seems like you had a great social media event yesterday with more !	 
and now for after-hours jam tunes at work . Tonight ? ! What do you all jam to ?	 
lol , people asking about the 1st line . " It doesn't matter if you love him [ a man] , or capital H-I-M [ God ] " .	 
Fun night at the barn !	 
wore rain boots for the most part of January	 
not sleeping tonight .	 
what 's the plan for tomorrow babydoll	 
Perkins with the wife then work at eleven should be a good night	 
Again ? I've already heard a million things . His co-star Jon Cryer was on Conan last night talking about all the stuff .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
I am sick :/ but fine  are you going to put any parts today ?	 
lol ur evil we want da story today	 
over 100 plays today ! check me out www.myspace.com/yungboss313	 
get as much out of this Country as possible . The Internet may be silenced but as The Press i hope you are not !	 
yeah I will . Good games tonight .	 
2 mins into the 1st ep of UK season 5 it 's already light years better than the 1st 2 eps of the US version of .	 
Still quite upbeat this morning . Odd . If you missed it , here are my thoughts on last night 's match 
A good night to go out to eat	 
I forgot to turn in a paper that was important . lol . but she may have lied for me .  my little man/woman advisor .	 
I can't wait to see that Moment 4 life video tonight .	 
good luck tonight ! I wish I could be there , but I am there in spirit 	 
good morning ! busy day ahead !  )	 
Why the fuck does it seem like January is extra long and it still ain't over with ?	 
Have you heard of ? Now u have no excuse . Come see them this Sat for free and help support 
The stars at night are big and bright , Deep on the heart of Texas . - Thanks Pee Wee Herman in Pee Wee 's Big Adventure	 
Happy Anniversary to and . May you make beautiful babies EVERY year 
Danielle and I are gonna pay you boys a visit tomorrow 	 
Congratulations to the graduating that are finishing up their last practice tonight ! .	 
I'll be twenty six in July . I look like I'm perpetually 16 though . Someday that will be useful to me .	 
I never imagined myself being this annoyed by him of all people but today . He 's REALLY fucking irritating my soul	 
Yo my b ! been so busy today we on for tomorrow for sure ! Bet !	 
tonight was great ! Make sure you wear ear plugs though !	 
Voting closes Monday please keep voting for me on humor guys it means a lot ! .	 
Watching chuck with my man . bout to grill some chicken . good night	 
the sun 's burnt out ; and the sky 's a pale shade of grey . 
what 's wrong ?!?! It 's fucking WWIII in here tonight . To hot for me . Peace in the middle east .	 
pleasure ! hope you got back ok . trains were screwed up tonight x	 
used glogster as a culmination of a collaboration and exploration of color between 3rd/4th graders and 3 year olds 
I can watch you tonight thanks to my hubby . Now I dont have to wait until Monday to watch the show and you .	 
Love both those ladies ! I may have to find some time and watch !	 
Night night sweetie ! Fab day !  Thanks for the fun and inspiration ! x	 
found a relevant placement to apply for . seeing as is ditching me tomorrow I may as well do it then . hmm	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
going to greenville in the morning to put putters in another store . golf headquarters . new white heads look beautiful !	 
We hired a great guy that was a quick learner and did awesome today on his 2nd day on the job !  I was really impressed .	 
catch us tonight event in kailua from 5- 7:30 pm	 
We better at least have a delay tomorrow !	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home ." and got Part 10-WHHAATTT !?! Try it 
residents and businesses beware men may use local road works to trick you . Our advice . Please RT	 
im going alone and must be one of the most hated fans . and some will do it to my face n sat near some aswell 	 
aint seen or hollered u my nigga just want to tell u I luv u bro I luv u 2 boi I'll get u Sat 12pm	 
It 's a puzzle . She may have fallen coming up slippery deck stairs now it hurts ? I didn't see ! Vet hopes time will heal .	 
He may not tell you , but he loves being pampered too . 
No blog today .p but im posting two bands tomarrow , anyone feel like texting me .	 
Join me for yoga tonight at Le Posh  at 7pm !	 
seem to remember Evra Vidic both struggling after Jan move . But next season were much stronger .  
watch it tonight !	 
Joining tonight 8 PM on Freedom Watch . We will be talking about my op-ed in today WSJ . . .	 
lost our game today 	 
Angie , Keva , and Charlie are off to NYC tomorrow for the ! Can't wait to see what fun things they return with ! 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I feel like Tuesday Trivia , wish it would hurry up and come back . Sherry Enema need to make their big return .	 
There 's always something in the past that creates who you are today . Lovely Gong Li	 
Can't wait till the moment for life video comes on tonight ! 
likes In the Morning by Junior Boys on Ping 
UIC game tonight . Go flames 
Needs to stop coming home and sleeping because that just leads to staying up late at night doing homework 
I cant help but smile when i see her face  " last night i saw you in my dreams , now i cant wait to go to sleep "	 
Can you send me the notes ? How was everything today ? What did I miss in Ethics ?	 
I'm uploading a rough demo of " Take A Picture " which I wrote and recorded yesterday and finished off today . Took my LIFE recording this .	 
we drink it by the gallon so it may have been there because of us .	 
[ Ask A Nurse ] Re Ferritin ?HI again , My Iron before treatment back in March was . 
Super busy day in the library . Filmed 3rd grade research/talk shows , prepared for illustrator visit and read book for Chickadee award .	 
Hope I manage decent sleep tonight up early to get hair cut then meeting bff for lunch .	 
finally stopped this morning , hopefully getting out tomorrow .! I do love the snow but maybe in moderation 	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
My Feb shows and a few in March are posted here Off now to Bar .	 
So I think I just read a poem made by a 5th grader . oh wait . It was Born This Way .	 
Link in Sun story on ice-block dog " Click here to see more photos of abused B.C. dogs " 
Its official 79% in favour of returning to work on Monday in strike 
Well IF anyone is down to go to the beach on saturday to go drink and chill during the day , let me know	 
I'm having one this saturday !	 
gLee on the 6th after SuperBowl yay !	 
Caitlin am I still comin over tomorrow ?	 
Woo hoo ! I hear there 's a massive kegger in Cairo , Illinois tomorrow . Spread the word by social media .	 
Once again . what poppin tonight CHICAGO ?. I feel like I'm gonna end up doing something that I never do . just because I'm BORED !	 
Good food today , and a hot chocolate that almost put me in a diabetic coma . There was a challenge to make it as chocolatey as possible .	 
Looks like that 83 in oil will be seen tomorrow , not next week . $USO $$	 
good one . well while your on twitter . leave some info in my dm . and i'll see ya tonight 	 
c'mon TVU or web don't leave down .	 
official ban by the government on protests and gatherings 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Damn I'm doin a double at work tonight . meaning stayed from opening till closing smh .	 
I def told you that last night ! Lolz	 
Interesting article for all home buyers and sellers . Become a fan today and like me ! If you or anyone you know . 
is triple h going to be back sunday	 
Join me tonight at Ceniza Lounge inside Paseo Colorado for the most fun you can have on Thursday night with your . 
 night  looking round a uni in guildford tomorrow . pretty excited ! It looks awesome :D	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
You think you've come so far ? You think you learnt along the way ? You're better off by far , Than where you were jus ' yesterday	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
done , but not feeling too good . Running and chest infections dont go too well together . I may give it a rest for a few weeks	 
I consider myself a crayon . . I may not be your favorite color , but some day you're going to need me to complete your picture .	 
Car Tuning Tips May Be More Abundant Than You Imagined 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
It may be winter out here but I am feeling summer in my heart .	 
A good movie , soup and my bed ! Makes for a good night of being sick . I hate being sick .	 
to watch Skins on e4+1 because if i didn't people would have told me what happened at work tomorrow and i'd never watch it	 
off to bed good night !	 
How are you ? The largest protest thus far is said to be Fri . Do you think ElBaradei returning now will help persuade the gov't?	 
EXCITING NEWS - we just heard our friends at the Little Green Bean Boutique will be on Indy Style tomorrow morning !	 
" We could be perfect one last night , and die like star-crossed lovers when we fight ."	 
First canvasser of the season tonight . Scared young fella looking for Labour vote . ' why ?' i ask . ' To get fianna fail out .' Any policies ?	 
When clicking on the Seesmic iOS app from my 3rd gen iPod Touch click on my added Facebook profile I get an open close . Ideas ?	 
Thursday Mass Transit Update A massive snow storm that dumped more than one foot of snow in many areas of the T . 
Im off to bed , night gorgeous ! 3xx	 
" i woke up today with this feeling that better things are coming my way ." love that song !	 
Live chat about lessons 1-3 tonight after 
all my ppl today !	 
Today , someone ask me if I was american  . I don't know if it 's good . Is it good ? S hahaha	 
Murray becomes 1st woman to lead Senate veterans panel She has worked to ensure that service personnel with pos . 
I am pretty sure that every Police song in their catalogue has passed through my head at least once today . WHY ? SENDING OUT AN SOS . Literally	 
As Dexter would say ." Tonights the night " Vampire Diaries is back . Episode 212 ! Don't miss it .	 
no school for me tomorrow it 's my Friday . Lol	 
yea , i'll still be screaming like im sitting front row , tho i may not have a voice on tues cuz im also going to wm raw after	 
Boys and Girls Basketball take on West Albany tomorrow night with the Girls at home and the boys at West . Tip off starts at 7pm .	 
Good morning  Jizo-sann next to my cafe . cafe WAKAKUSA 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home fro ." and got Part 3-MISSING ! Try it 
Morning all  sun :	 
Ok mam  but text me in the morning and tell me when your on your way  lol what gate do you get dropped off at ?	 
Goodnight world , I hope tomorrow is as good as yesterday or in fact better  x	 
Finished logistics 4 tomorrow 's shipments , from fulfillment center . 40 boxes going out tomorrow . That 's a pretty big order 4 us in 1 day .	 
Have a good night . 
ai ela tava falando quote de august rush	 
i might come sat morning	 
After Opera night club we going 2 aka at THIS Tuesday lolz 
Today is ladies day at Kia Mall Of Ga . All ladies take 10% off all services . Listen mornings to 680 am " The Fan " for specials of the day !	 
East coast only 30 minutes  Don't miss tonight 	 
A taste to tide you over via magazine // Swiss Design Awards opens tomorrow .	 
Today absolutely sucks .	 
pieces of me  today 
I know and so easy to do ! :/ well I'm off to try and sleep now , good night ! X	 
Kobe Bryant named an All-Star starter for the 13th time . See the complete starting fives here . 
haha , true . i have monday off .  my second sem starts tues ! :D	 
Friday morning is here and am so not looking fwd to the evening . have a conf call at 10 pm . bah !	 
This is morning . A beautiful things are waiting . GET OVER IT , get your ass up and works for ALLAH 's BLESS . So ., Morning everyone . 
President to visit stricken north east of today . Will b in , .	 
Haha my hair !  Our friends had a special visitor 2 their offices today ! 
That 's me on 20th Sagittarius rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored	 
Night hun , have a good day be safe x	 
My baby will be 3 tomorrow , she 's such a big girl ;-)	 
I'm enjoying it now before it is all rumpled up tomorrow .	 
lies , i gave u hug earlier todaY :' (	 
you got it ! we getting this thing right TONiGHT !	 
" Police spreading gasoline on cars to blame fires tomorrow on protestors /via "	 
wanna dm ? otherwise you can wait till tomorrow .	 
Okay , good , because someone else was talking about him positively today to me on the phone . He on Facebook ?	 
1st Food Fight - oh shit ! SE is the best ! 2nd Food Fight- bitch you just fucked us ALL up !	 
Tomorrow . shall i say today , when i wake up i plan on eating , chilling , listening to music . and playing xbox 
haha yea bt how da high been since i been gone i heard yall had a lockdown today ?	 
my shit ? You may like it . But they got some nice artists in the area	 
Rockin out to some old time Usher .! haha thinking about a possible skype date with tomorrow  lol	 
nuh uh . ayee you fake too cuz I texted you twice today and you ain't reply punk !	 
Contacted by The Tennessean on Thursday , Titans owner Bud Adams seemed surprised to learn that he was the Titans owner .	 
if we get 6 inches here everyone panics , lol . You should have seen all the wrecks I passed tonight , with a inch of snow , lol	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Finished logistics 4 tomorrow 's shipments , from fulfillment center . 40 boxes going out tomorrow . That 's a pretty big order 4 us in 1 day .	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Keep God 1st and he'll continue to open doors , and eventually he'll hand over the keys to success	 
I got stuck watching American Idol last night w my fam that story about the girl in the accident broke my heart . what a god damn shame .	 
so naw . he 's class lulz . I'm not wishing you happy birthday ' til the night .	 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love yous2s2s2s2s2	 
We may be two of the only men to know that spelling . Niche . Ghostbusters was awesome .	 
It 's Friday ! I juz can't wait for the day to end before it began . Hahaah	 
Arrived on campus this morning at 8:30 am , going home for the first time today.i'd say i deserve the night in , free of schoolwork !	 
Oh muffin ! What are you looking for ? We can bitch about it over beer and whiskey tonight !	 
Really ? I coulda sworn the commercial was promoting it for tonight .	 
Awee you missed the funniest day today in physics ) haha	 
I just wanna know why he ain't text me today . Smh petty	 
no OHL game tonight ?	 
Have class till noon today . Then indonesian food and ONSEN ! 	 
have fun tonight (( wish i was there !	 
Pretty kool . My 4th day on my new job . God is good ! How was urs ?	 
so wishing we have another snow day tomorrow	 
. so I was advertising today while I was driving , shouting to every person and car that passes by haha . I'm crazyyy	 
Feelin ' the LOVE at opening night party !	 
well its snowing again tomorrow . so yeah im going out to the high paying houses ! 	 
Looks like Tango tonight .	 
Congratulations to the 1st Knick to start an All-Star Game since 92 ! Congratulate him here 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I thought guy clearing this morning was from 3801 . Looked familiar starting from that end . Not sure , though .	 
Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking . Gonna shoot a new commercial for 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I wanted to play today !	 
last night was an eye OPENER	 
Snow and more snow . thank God . Jersey shore tonight	 
I am now in kitchen late night with my mom she 's pulling out deviled eggs , celery slathered with pineapple cream cheese , spiced peaches .	 
Be here tonight to see some amazing local art ! 
Last exam tomorrow ! Thank god !. Is it bad I don't feel like studying at all ? Its only advanced functions right ? Fml	 
my family and i go to Perak at Sunday . yea !	 
My legs feel better than they did this morning . Time for yoga .	 
Good morning Master Harada . Get ready for the next battle .	 
with ya . This week has been awesome but today is the worst .	 
So I get Friday off tomorrow . That'll be nice since we didn't get another fog delay today . 	 
Need extra money or a new career ? Become an Uppercase Living Demonstrator TODAY for only $55  PLS !	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Canadian gets world 's 1st Beatles degree 
Let us help you lease a home today . Contact us and we will have you in the front of the line when you find the one . 
Ima get two hours of extra sleep tonight 
Good Afternoon . Did you receive our Bulletin today ? Otherwise remember to sign up on our website . 
You guys seem so distant today . It 's like I'm not even behind you .	 
And possibly be depressed by Javier Bardem in the afternoon .	 
Super stoked for tomorrow 
Mafia ! This lady loves her Rock ! Take her out would ya ? Da NEW FAMILY Jewels ! Get you some today ! 
Fox CBO&#039 ; s Warning About Debt Crisis Deficit may break records in 2011 
Five Star FORCE members you've received your revised February calendar ! If you have any questions , please contact us . 
Kickback for my b-day this saturday 8 p.m 22 exchange n akron b . y . o . b	 
Housework Busy afternoon food shopping Probably sit and argue on Twitter otherwise . yep , should be fun 	 
and then Edwina Currie said on tonight " Let 's hope they surveillance the right people " =(	 
today 's my birthday all I wish is you follow me 	 
Yesterday I saw a trash truck broken down on the side of the road ; driver was holding under the fuel tank a handful of burning trash !	 
Saturday at to promote his book , Zombie Spaceship Wasteland 	 
is bringing the food the book the Feb 9th 
Saturday at to promote his book , Zombie Spaceship Wasteland 	 
Clutch kicks off North American tour Jan . 29 at | 
dood you gotta stop copying me . Morning ! . Or Afternoon !, the time you're most likely to be reading this	 
help is futile ! may I help you ?	 
Does Friday make you more productive at work , or is your concentration shattered for the entire day ? 
although it 's a wednesday tip , it 's really yummy on Thursday ! 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Off work today . few days then training begins	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is  
My office is freezing today . it 's a nice change , except I realy didn't dress for it . 	 
Home from a long day . Observed 5th period then parent teacher conferences after school . Left the building 12 hours after I got there .	 
Good morning all , and now i still feeling bad 	 
As a you have a certain nonchalance about you , and some may even think you are disinterested in th .	 
Live music tomorrow night ! The Platform starts 5:30 ! Enjoy Happy Hour and dinner while listening to great music !	 
someone should drive me to Disneyland right now . i wanna see underoath tonite	 
ready for tomorrow have a show at lizards in huntsville tomorrow at nine .	 
These are the shoes KG is likely going to wear on Sunday .  152-120 is the all time . 
Im going to go to bed at 9 tonight .	 
Think and grow rich VIDEO for the 21st century 
Need to clean this house so I can go out tomorrow .	 
today 's just not been my day . - a few things have annoyed me , skins , cutting my foot open with glass , losing . 
$GBPCHF If U.S GDP comes better then expected tomorrow . I think CHF and JPY has more chance to go higher as risk appetite will rise again .	 
What happened in the towns around Wilton today ? A train slips the track , a truck driver escapes a rollover and more . 
Weirdest night ever .	 
Gardening in winter .As I watched the news this morning and saw how much snow places like New York has gotten , . 
Check out our new Valentine Cupcakes now available through Feb 14 ! It is a Red Velvet cake with a cream cheese . 
Where you used to be , there is a hole in the world , which I find myself constantly walking around in the daytime , and falling in at night .	 
Over here doing these chem h/w problems ! smh I have a quiz tomorrow smh	 
These are the shoes KG is likely going to wear on Sunday .  152-120 is the all time . 
Stop in any night of the week and enjoy 's newly added menu of craft cans . -- $10 for 4 | 
Is here yet ? The may have answers , or does he ? 
wut happened the other night . must've fell asleep	 
i think on monday im gonna give a clown makeover :D	 
yesterday rumors were all over the place . Even E ! themselves were insinuating that she was . Today , they confirmed she wasnt !	 
We are still looking for snowmen and girls to photograph tomorrow . Top three win a box of Christmas candy from . 
My son was so naught today	 
" Man Skills 101 " starts tonight ! If you're a guy , are you going ?	 
Baby dust continues to shine at CCB . we have another June bundle of joy on the way !	 
tomorrow but got another job interview few chapters to read for my research proposal n a whole lotta other ill shit to do :D :D	 
So who built a snowman today ? We did . Send us a photo of yours ! We'll share it with everyone .	 
Head 2 church prayer night . need to be rejuvenated , it 's been a rough work week . But Life IS good .	 
Spirit sist ! Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking . Gonna shoot a new commercial for Tol .	 
Hello fellow tweeters ! I have been having a great day . Tmw night I have my best friend spend the night for the 1st time in 2 wks . Happy !	 
Suzanne Vega plays the Palace of Fine Arts tomorrow night 
round up the LC boys and come to the show tonight ! 	 
Today is your day ! Your mountain is waiting . So - get on your way . ~ Dr Seuss	 
Here 's a clip of Alex Reymundo on Good Morning America . Catch him on Latino 101 tomorrow night at 9pm on Si TV 
Idea . in Denver at on Feb 5 . 
It just occurred to me that our 10th store is located at 10 prospect street . Awesome !	 
Beyond scared straight come on tonight ! 	 
The first web page of the 2nd version of recode shady is cool .	 
Superbowl Sunday is just around the corner ! Look what we've got in-store for you 
Forever young , forever young , May you stay forever young .	 
How would the Richard M . Daley of the past run for mayor today ? - 
. smh . I know it got up to 50 degrees today but that doesn't mean you should be out in shorts , flip flops and a tank to .	 
Appeals Court Rejects Convicted Killer 's Claim Convicted killer Perry March 's words have come back to haunt him . 
u gotta watch wipeout ! did u even make it to the studio today ? i saw u were in Columbus park and wow its very nice over ther	 
Appeals Court Rejects Convicted Killer 's Claim Convicted killer Perry March 's words have come back to haunt him . 
Get in on today 's Groupon deal $12 for $25 Worth of Asian-Style Tacos at T.A.S.T.E. 
Come check out No Sleep for the Bear tonight at Y Not III ! Were going to be hangin out there all night so come have a drink with us ! 9pm 	 
New jersey shore tonight ! !	 
Join us in fighting the cold season with Hydra S.O.S. winter protection the this Saturday 8:30 PM .	 
Urg . Suprise giant project , assigned tonight and must be done tonight . Yay .	 
For some reason i feel like getting drunk tonight . bout to cop me a bottle son	 
Didnt go in today for work because this common cold is turning into who done it smh	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Pray for . Very worried as it seems that government is planning a war crime tomorrow against people . We are all ready .	 
With 13 tweets , today 's top poster about -#jazz- is . See at 
American Idol broke my heart tonight ! That girl at the end ! :/ and his dedication to her !	 
What do you think of the graphic novel version of The Alchemist ? I bought today and I'm really enjoying it .	 
Museum Office are now moving starting today , still in the Warehouse , but now moving upstairs . Should be there by Monda .	 
Men 's bball needs your help tonight against Boise State ! Let 's pack the Pan Am ! Game time is at 7pm ! Let 's go .	 
Tired . really tired ! But . Friday is almost here !	 
Just finished soundcheck in Norman . Come out tonight !	 
Thursday Iran Talking Points 
Why are women 's breasts getting bigger ? The answers may disturb you . via 
not sure if I can hold it together tomorrow . gonna be one of the hardest days yet . much harder ones ahead I'm sure .	 
i hope my dad washes my sweat shirt tomorrow . or my " sweat jacket " lmao .	 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
Holy Shit ! Vampire Diaries are on tonight and i'm so excited xD	 
Police Beat for January 27 
that mean that you are backing out tomorrow ?	 
morning .  anu na message mu cia ?	 
I smell the very predictable hype machine at work ; trying to wind the baying dogs into a state of frenzy for th .	 
New name picked tomorrow !  for a chance to win $ 100.00 USD ! .	 
Copter shot video of a person being rescued from a frozen lake this afternoon . Sounds like person went on ice after a dog and fell through .	 
Who goin to the icon tonite ?	 
Today is one of those days that I've gotten a lot accomplished . Even with a porn break . I win . Ha !	 
I got the email earlier today . So sad  
my foot is really bothering me . dr tomorrow 	 
' Vampire Diaries ' set cursed ? Ian Somerhalder talks filming tonight 's episode with walking pneumonia - . 
Coverage starts in T-30 minutes ! Don't forget Tonight 's Knicks-Heat game is on at 8pm . .	 
yea she s not taking it , i need to get pill pockets tomorrow . I tried prying her mouth open , didnt work	 
Best of luck to if Internet actually goes down tomorrow . Scary .	 
Set up recurring payments today with  This will be my first car , so I'm super excited ! I think I'm gonna love ' em .	 
Don't forget will be on tonight ! Tune in !	 
Transmedia Victoria was fine yesterday . And , thx to you see it all in 1 page ( very nice i .	 
What is the justification for the pain and suffering , and health issues many young people encounter today ? www.angelofmercyusa.org	 
Egypt shuts down Internet on eve of Friday protest /Crazy .	 
The Fayetteville Chamber is hosting a " Good Morning Fayetteville " business before hours tomorrow morning at 7:30 . 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday . 
Blessing and honor , glory and power be unto The Ancient of Days ! Praise Him today and He will lift you up ! Hallelujah !	 
Bring on party Saturday .! What are your plans ?	 
. I'm looking for a sublet in SF or East Bay , so if you know anyone . hear of anything . Also think there 's a meetup in Feb .	 
SI . com Jeff Fisher out as coach of Titans ; he was NFL 's longest active tenured coach 	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Good morning , boo .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
my Love is out doing her thing tonight so imma try to entertain myself  sn show out baby do the same	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Ok my first official " ONE " Vodka drink will be called the " ONE " Night Stand . ONE Vodka Lemonade with/w/out salt on the glass and lemon	 
I'm live WMPG 7:30 pm today on healthcare Maine bill to criminalize any all acts implementing patient protection affordable care act .	 
My sis asked me if i was goin to tonight . I really don't feel up to it , but i get in free so why not ?	 
Good night twitter world hope you have had/having a great day xx	 
Presumed it wasn't a Damian Hurst jobby ! They know what they're doing , you'll be fine . Then you get to watch United win on sat	 
taking back sunday - live from orensanz	 
Good morning uncle A ! have a nice day ! ^^	 
Tryin 2 hard Nah sweetheart ! No need for heels fri morn ! Just pack those heels in ur suitcase 
On my way home . I love my second family so much . Can't wait for tonight ( :	 
! Friday Price Update at 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
no prob ! Anyway , may i ask what your age is ?	 
Bask in the festive season in the lead up to Chinese New Year Esplanade Outdoor . FREE ! The Spring Fling Jan 31-Feb 3 
Night night sweetie xoxox	 
Had fun today with my brother Big Cookie 
i will be in LA Feb . 26th for the BET showcase !	 
I saw this in person last night . Crazy ! -- Phoenix Suns Sick Dunk and Fall through Net 
Dinner Time ! Let 's get some Nachos ! It 's Nacho Thursday ! 
C'mon, who thrown a chair at a fellow soldier while cursing out a superior 
My 1st solo album " People Hear What They See " will be available on later this year . Are you as excited as .	 
The bros show sounds awesome - and we should definitely make it a date . Fun abounding ! They had a good day Monday , too , I hear .	 
lol . are u coming down tomorrow	 
I have to go give Paige her folder before tomorrow	 
Engaged ? Attend our Wedding Parties events . RSVP at stores today . from Crate and Barrel 
Nice policy - I think I may have to adapt it as well 	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite + hahaha	 
if you mentally say " wed-nes-day " while writing wednesday	 
Making a cup of coffee for another late night of sewing . 
A win on Saturday won't mathematically wrap it up  and then Fury away . Looks like Roar will receive trophy in front of GCU 	 
Since isn't new , I can watch instead of recording it.I'll help Fox get better ratings tomorr .	 
No school tomorrow ! I knew it	 
But the night is young !	 
Is it wrong I need a napper at like seven at night ?	 
i got practice at night after the game 	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Lmfao ! " Lets hit Norwich soon with our hoe 's and bro 's " LOL ! the funniest thing iver heard today !	 
Hey I'm the class clown in my may lad but I also have the highest grade bitch so laugh at that	 
now i can laugh at my actions from last night , wasn't worth it .	 
We are weaving the future on the loom of today . Grace Dawson	 
that 's why examples like Somalia aren't good examples b/c they were 3rd world w/ no understanding 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
i kinda wish you hated me after yesterday so i could be alone , i like it better that way . 
And I know you may think I am slightly mad . honestly I am	 
California dispensaries may soon carry marijuana soft drinks 
Looking for something to do Friday night ? Wine for Warmth and Dancing Feet for Heat at 
Love is something eternal ; the aspect may change , but not the essence .	 
anyone want a shout out for tomorrows Fab Friends Day ! 
" I dare do all that may become a man ; Who dares do more is none ". Macbeth Quote  . 
This is Jennifer DJ . Today for entertainment purpose , i'll recommend and broadcast some international pop songs for you all . Enjoy !	 
ohh bitch dont fuckin do it tonight !	 
Tomorrow is Data Protection Day ! Check out EU video on privacy on the internet . Gets to the point 
ps could u make me a drink for my bday ?  ur website is one of the few bookmarks i have	 
Lets discuss Has God spoken something to your heart today ? Do you have a testimony you'd like to share ?	 
Evening everyone  So glad to be back !	 
" It advocates the scientific method and pursues that to a finality that may be called Rationalistic ." 
how is everyone ? tonight 	 
Life just got a little more interesting today  I love making new friends !	 
There u are  ) Enjoy the last show tomorrow wish u well LUV U 3 oxox	 
I did oragami today and my crane actually looked somewhat like a crane ! My goal is to have the crane look like a crane by the time I'm 60 .	 
I'm a twit , I'm tweeted out . Think I'm going to watch Mock . Good night beautiful , sleep well xkx	 
Tonight The Patriots take on WBC at 8pm 
I may have a spare ticket  Saturday April 16th at Festival Hall	 
Day off tomorrow  don't need to set an alarm :D aha	 
We strapped a camera to Mike Vick 's helmet in yesterday 's NFC Pro Bowl practice . Check out this amazing footage . .	 
So this may be a strange thing to send , but it 's a gallery of natural breasts It may help !	 
Are you a beautiful bride-to-be or know one ? You should def be at the Bridal Showcase Expo in Brooklyn on Feb 9th ! 
Thought today was going to be a good day ! It pretty much sucked though !	 
Evening Inspiration To be courageous is scary , but believe in yourself and strength will come .	 
Phone companies charged 20% VAT before January rise 
Now playing Artie Shaw - Softly , as in a Morning Sunrise on 
I wouldn't mind chilling with you tomorrow . 	 
i promise i'm not really as evil as i may appear to be in this clip . 
s/o to cus i know shes gonna look cute af tomorrow night 3 ( ;	 
Get started Today with FREE ADVERTISING for Your Websites while advertising for others . Start TODAY ; 
Obama may get power to shut down Internet without court oversight 
What kind of video should we do for 4th Anniversary - 3rd was pretty good , right ?	 
This should be a fun night 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Wow 1st day of class professor shows up 20 mins late ! 2nd day of class 10 mins late nd is tellin us his life story ! Teriible	 
Macworld trade show opens its doors for 2nd year without Apple ; some vendors betting on iPad 2 - Fort Lauderdale . 
Finishing writing day with 1000 words of blogging . What will be my first bad movie of Feb .? 
ITS GOIN DOWN ON THE 19TH ! Movin in wit my nigga ^o^ I wont ever get a chance to stay sober around tha .	 
' Whatever the screen - We supply and make them all ' 
we supposed to play yall tomorrow bruh ,	 
Complete Internet Blackout in Egypt After blocking Twitter on Tuesday and , intermittently , Facebook and Google . 
If wasn't on tonight I'd already be asleep . So tired right now .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Night night sweeties see you in the morrow ! Xxx	 
My trainer just saw me leaving the bar . immediately got a phone call asking if I was comin to boot camp tonight . 
Nice view on the evening walk 
u killin me tonight	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
should be given their own actual radio show . They put it down last night 
cant wait tell saturday you i been texting her all day	 
I need someone to remind me to ship that box off to my husband tomorrow , lol !	 
Did screencaps of yesterday 's shows from 
Ill try convincing the guys tomorrow . Hey , im going too ! you wont be yourself at the very least ! L 	 
Soo this kid at my work just told me I looked very beautiful today . what a cute compliment =)	 
Going to seriously without a doubt fail tomorrow :' (	 
no school tomorrow so you were complaining for no reason lls damn I love being right	 
Wah should have packed yesterday , today morning rush like fuck .	 
Good morning Mumbai !	 
adi , sama ka sa europe please please please . sa may . please please please . its gonna be so fun .	 
have fun and a good night	 
i love friday 	 
it was my birthday yesterday 33 mind giving me a belated bday ?  33	 
Sore eye greets me a good morning .	 
Spotted venus as I was walking this morning .	 
About to sleep soundly in my lovely new bed good night	 
Is starting to get rather tired , so gonna head on off for an early night . Sleep well and wake !	 
Are we staying with ' ' hashtag tomorrow ?	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
we only have 1 month  left to get to $500 . we are now at $270 . every donation counts 
Dayum I dropped ma phone like 3 times now I think ima go get a neww one on saturday	 
lotus or ultra bar tonight ?	 
what you about to do tonight	 
I guess no dessert for me tonight !	 
boarding the plane in charlotte to arizona . leaving the snow behind for today	 
Oh darn ! I gotta babysit the nieces and Max tonight . Fun fun .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
im gonna . and get a picture bro c'mon hahaha	 
I'm may not be the best , but I'm not like the rest . 
From July 1998 through the end of 2009 , killed over 23,000 dogs , cats , and other companion animals -- 
I just took "  you turn to a vampire night , in the day ur a normal girl , wh ." and got oh great l ! Try it 
everytime i tweet something like " today sucks ", a lot of you agree . and that makes me sad . we need to make better day .	 
Today 's show about " The Bravest Families In America " had me in tears . The families were so INSPIRING !	 
We are so politically correct today I can't even tell a filthy , money grubbing Jew joke anymore .	 
my homegirl mama made my day today . i walked outside and the 1st thing she said was " Trai you got some good hair " 
morning tea for Qld flood relief just raised $445 in 14 minutes ! .	 
I know you usually dont hear me talk like this but I got a lil game I wanna play tonite-Tamia	 
We will be at the event on Sunday . What can we expect from you ?	 
That 's great ! Have a relaxing night-you deserve it .	 
early morning swim at the beach . crystal blue waters and soft sun . I love you summer ! )	 
ugh sorry about today 
i think im going to in june ( :	 
bad night for bettin , i hope i still hit tho	 
I may not agree w/some of my countrys decisions or culture but its better than whatever is happening in the Arab world . 
How 's everybody doing tonight ? I just went all-in at the gym . Legs today . 
Heading for the big smoke in the morning . Come and see us at Bubble London - www.bubblelondon.com !	 
Probably moving into my new apartment in Sioux Falls on February 7th . If you need a place to crash , don't hesitate to call !	 
My buddy hasn't talked to me today I wonder how she 's doin 	 
Ok I'm shattered . It 's bed time for me and my hot water bottle . Night all xx	 
my homegirl mama made my day today . i walked outside and the 1st thing she said was " Trai you got some good hair " 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love you2s2s2s2ss2s	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 212	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is  
ok seriously , need to shut up and go to bed night all , love yous xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx	 
vball , pit chorus , and possibly sleep ! long night ahead !	 
we can do this tonight if u wanna fight !	 
Lose Weight Tonight 10 Starch Resistant Recipes You Can Make Tonight The Carb Lover 's Diet promises big weight . 
really ? no school tomorrow lol kinda wish i was back in MD . but then again not really	 
come on online . like ur games in Russia . the other team I was on n Dec had a website that showed their gms live	 
Head spinning . will dream of masses tonight . 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
Th Egyptian National TV was broadcasting cartoons today . 
Good for him ! Way to bounce back ! Take down those Hoosiers tonight !	 
are you going to notice me today ?	 
Celtics are playing tonight !	 
Well , today is shit . My mother is in the hospital . Will things begin to calm down soon ? Pretty please ?	 
at everyone who has school tomorrow	 
Choose your words carefully . They may come back to destroy you .	 
Met a millionaire today . To his credit he does all his own work when he has cash and big old lumps who could save him all the grief . Respect	 
do know if there 's been any talk of if and when Oren Eizenman may be reassigned back to Elmira ?	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Aww hows my bby boy !? My son 's birthday party is going to be on February 26 th , 2011 in Southwest Philadelphia .	 
does come on tonight .	 
what you doing tonight	 
To all our teen center kids , We will be closed tomorrow night , but we will still be open during the afternoon . 
i had a good day today , skipped the whole day chilled with my loves 	 
My tat coming along well.can't wait til the 5th th get more !	 
Lol things that make you think who was the 1st person to decide it was cool to drink breast milk from a cow	 
Bailey makes record 10th Pro Bowl as CB  
Follow me on Twitter 4 a chance to win an autographed copy of my new album ! - Give-Aways tonight at 9pm EST	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Need lots of rest before tomorrow game	 
Go to www.comedybyturae.com for tix for the Soul Comedy Show ! SUNDAY two great shows , 6 8:30 pm ! Hosted by !	 
dont do it . LOL . weekend starts tomorrow . if u hava choice .	 
 doin work in MSG tonight ! First time TNT is in NY for a while !	 
you want to chi ji me early in the morning isit ?	 
Getting stiff as a board from all the shoveling today .	 
I'm so stressed out ! So many thing to do tonight and I want everything to b perfect for our fans . I love you long time .	 
Getting psyched for Global Game Jam tomorrow ! This is my second year organizing but I've still got butterflies . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
neither one of my best friends texted me back today . so fck both of yall !	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Well , and even worse , she had no data to back up such a claim . I may draw a new conclusion , but I'll always back it up w/ data	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release by the end of May an e .	 
The CW just ruined my week by not airing the new Supernatural this Friday . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 . ws	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Weatherman said the high Saturday will be 58 . Me thinks I'll pull the mtn . bike out and head to Enterprise South . Can't wait !	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
dam twitter is weak today .	 
It 's a Friday and people are using the hashtag like it 's a Tue night chat ! It 's great !	 
lol me either . Is u goin down mosiac on sat	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
morning ka n'SU^_^/ja happy all day	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 ANCHORAGE , Alaska  - Alaska officials must release b . 
You feel like paradise and i need a vacation tonight 	 
Exclusive sneak peek of tonight 's episode today on at 5/4c ! 
you have a CLASS ?! On the same day ?! And I thought my school was brutal ending classes yesterday -__- well goo luck today ! 	 
first of all my heels are only two inches today , ya know . just like your penis .	 
Every night is the same old dream , and I hate to close my eyes 
How dumb was I for going to work yesterday .	 
Weeping may endure for a night but joy cometh in the morning || Psalms 30:5	 
Kids crave routine . today 's incident is right on schedule . We can count on you , bud .	 
if we dont have school tomorrow . someone please save me . im sick of my family	 
I don't know what to make of today . It 's so bleh .	 
and tonight ! :D	 
How many people have ever just sat down and read the dictionary ?	 
now what is it going to take to appreciate the performance of shane andrews in april of 2000	 
youre taking a lot of pictures today , feeling pretty ? 	 
I think ima do tonight	 
I can't get asleep , anyway aren't you at college tomorrow ? shouldn't you be asleep ? since I'm off tomorrow .	 
Mom hey i may need that later ! Me uck saggy old man penis . Mom hardly . 	 
Actually made it out of the driveway today - YES ! Let 's hear it for tiny ' miracles ' - I'm beginning to think they matter than large goals do	 
When Ele , Crystal and Jo raid your fridge at night and you're left to do the dishes while everyone else is asleep .	 
What has happened to ? 	 
today was awesome .  cant get friends better than mine 3	 
are up for 1st of feb campaign with ?	 
try adding night terrors and sleepwalking to the mix . Rough	 
Didnt like not texting anybody today 
Taking my baby Ra Ra shopping today	 
I was looking forward to hearing what some of you learned today . but I guess no one learned anything except pity .	 
Managed to cut and pin two of the filler blocks for BOM I'm doing today . Seriously going into withdrawal w my sewing machine in the shop 	 
yeah . muz fully maximize e duration . Next trip back will b in end may  hopefully I can come back as often . inshallah	 
Cave boyz video shoot tonight . For " scoop " we need you	 
Going to school tomorrow after missing all week .	 
And I watch netflix over cable so . yeah cable may be getting cancelled soon . I don't think it 's worth it .	 
Sanity may be madness but the maddest of all is to see life as it is and not as it should be . -Don Quixote 
What a great class last night ! thank you Lisa Walls Calle for your quilting expertise ! 
haha still sounds like code to me ! See you tomorrow . Did you know there 's . will DM you ? X	 
I should have tomorrow ! That 's my evening sorted then ! :D	 
I am drastic need of a girls night my kids are driving me crazy right now !	 
Tickets still on sale for our show W/ Nevermore May 9th just $10 but act now for a discount	 
Sitting here doing nothing . Not a big fan of life today .	 
I may be over Charlie Sheen stories but I will never get sick of Stan Rosenfield 's responses	 
son of a Bi**h Sunday lmao God forgive me	 
If the information blackout is not lifted before the Friday prayers , then you must say a prayer for Egyptians . God .	 
No mood for school today ah . Can partial ?	 
bart do you work tomorrow I'm coming to buy se prime meat !	 
I'm going to wear my to my math exam tomorrow , and write my exam in 3D . Wouldn't that be cool ?	 
thank you for completely ruining my evening .	 
Give us a wave at the NTA 's last night 
Bask in the festive season in the lead up to Chinese New Year Esplanade Outdoor . FREE ! The Spring Fling Jan 31-Feb 3 
wait till you see part two  out monday	 
Mine too . Enjoy ! today is one of the best days of my year . Prospect Handbook came !	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I actually want to go to school tomorrow .	 
do you want room service too ? Ha ha ok man , night !	 
So . Never say never is only showing in theaters one day ? Bcs it says in the commercial " only showing February 11th ." o . o	 
Tonight 's Mayoral debate info , live blogging from , live stream 
thanks God it 's friday 	 
tomorrow I'm going to rearrange all of my room so I have more room for activities . Seriously .	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Some wise words of advice from our senior counselor , Mary Mitchell . Sometimes you may just want to keep silent ! 
in egypt its still the 25th ?	 
The babies  head is wet . Kebab is under de-construction . Mother and baby home tomorrow afternoon .	 
NFL Players forfeit millions if no deal by March 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
morning man meg . 	 
is premiering ! Moment 4 Life " tonight at 830 on MTV , be tuned in !	 
Got quite a bit done today 	 
You can never not smile at THAT ! No matter how terrible you may be feeling 	 
how can gabby like maths ! wait till she get in 4th n 5th	 
is just commenting on that picture enough for an RSVP ? I will see you there , moving up Sunday	 
G'morning all ! Single Sagittarius back on hunting mode ! Haha . Have a great day everyone ! ^_^	 
The only day that 's all yours  Hehe I'm off to sleep   Night , love ya ! Xx	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 213	 
Time to make a flourless chocolate cake for Mr . Dry 's birthday tomorrow night . finishing up some red wine while I cook me thinks !	 
i laughed so hard last night when i found that bag by the CD's! He sit there ALL THE TIME ! It was hiding in the dark .	 
It 's nearly February have you applied to LAC yet ? 
I'll explain what 's happened tomorrow my	 
maybe if i start cleaning my room now i'll be tired enough to sleep on time today	 
Just wanted to state for the record , that I didn't know Chik-fil-a was anti-gay before I took the kids to the play place today . 
Okay . Last night 's dream was amazing  it 's here 
Jcpenney had golden opportunity to make me happy tonight . and didnt	 
TSS ALE:O ne or more device parity protected units still not fully operational . Fri Jan 28 12:30 GMT	 
no ! haha did i tell u he was gonna walk me to class AGAIN today . haha .	 
Date night tonight . Girls night tomorrow . I am excited .	 
If the information blackout is not lifted before the Friday prayers , then you must say a prayer for Egyptians . God .	 
not very tired despite 4 hours sleep . Gonna do my own version of GTL tonight . mine is gym , shower , movies . Much better than jersey shore .	 
My sis looked cute today . - 
REALLy ! Holy crap ! Now I'm happy ! R they giving anymore tonight !?	 
government ordered all communications in the country to be disconnected tomorrow . Seems massacre is being planned fo .	 
Today I think will save Australia $ 300,000 by 2pm - What 's your guess ? 
Guess ill fry some chicken tonight	 
is throwing a party ! 6,000 followers = random drawing for 55 ' . Follow and Refer to enter to win	 
I'm preaching Sunday night on the evils of forsaking the assembly to attend Small Groups . Hope we have more than 15 in attendance . 
Could it get any colder today ? Ask me how cold it was today . Seriously , ask cold was it today ? was so cold , I saw a Smurf turn white !	 
Who 's down to reach Blue Mountain March Break !?!?	 
8 1 at pool tonight , we are back in the title hunt with 2 games to go . We will do it cos we don't choke like the rest 	 
Yao Ming being voted to the All-Star game is just another reason why the NBA is 3rd favorite sport .	 
I'ma get past 6300 by the end of the night . My count STILL low	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love yous2s2s2s2s2s2	 
Home after a long day with mom and dad . Difficult decisions today .	 
well ur added word made it funnier . The 1st ones weren't Mickey D 's but I'm not w/ that venue that 's a mess	 
What 's the today . I ain't go in on one in a minute !	 
Kiss me thur the phone , kiss me thru the phone ~	 
Ooh ! Tomorrow is free admission night ! Yummy !	 
I am a guest speaker at the Brooklyn Educational Opportunity Center 's Family Unity Event on Saturday Feb . 5th from 10am-1pm . All are invited	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Made debut in ' 98 . Kobe has been named an starter for the 13th straight season .	 
Big wine and cheese night planned for you and some friends ? 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
iphone comes out feb 10 , most customers are eligible for an online upgrade	 
I am excited about Ricky Gervais on tonight 's all-new episode of The Office	 
oh just one with alistair . i'll figure it out tomorrow . need to get up early !	 
I'll do my hw tonight though . bc my weekend may be busy	 
and the CW thought " fans will buy we didn't know VD was against AI until tonight " 
Nice X Games on tonight 
" Captain , we're breaking up ! I can't give ya anymore time !" " Scotty . I just . need one more . night with you ."	 
Omg . Go away you creep . I have work tomorrow . We will not be sleeping together ! Lolololol	 
OMG i thought it was " we walk the night " and its " he walks the night "	 
so is it a party tonight ?	 
morning from Thailand enjoy the forth day naka I'm beside u ka gd luck 
I think the deal breaker in this instance is the fence . One must choose to sit on it , irrespective of how much it may hurt .	 
Metro board adopts cost control plan for Measure R bus , road and rail projects Local transit officials on Thurs . 
what 's the European equivalent of January 27th , 2011 ?	 
I have lots of homework today boo fucking hooo .	 
doesn't wanna hang out with me tomorrow /3	 
we don't need u beating nobody ass tonight . Count to 10 =)	 
On Tuesday , the senior point guard took his team to	 
warm summer day here its FRIDAY ! weekend tomorrow yay !	 
okay found out his name mati . making thursday nights that little bit more exciting	 
Got a cool new award today from Angie 's List ! SUPER SERVICE 
Homework , homework , homework , and laundry tonight !	 
I'm a gogo dancer at every Saturday 33 Hope to see you this Saturday ;] 
fun time shopping  now home . daddy cooked dinner . and a two hour delay tomorrow . good day 33	 
a thank u letter for the lady that interviewed me today	 
we workin out today ?	 
Join us this Sunday as we'll be finishing chapter 4 of 1 John . - www.thetownftc.org	 
Is he being serious ? I legit just sat there and listened to it backwards and heard nothing . I suck at this game .	 
you would actually be amazing hosting big brother haha . Loved you on loose women today btw  ! Xxx	 
lol why dont u have school tomorrow	 
the truth may set you free , but first it 's gonna piss you off .	 
ummm i just noticed ' s twitter avi has that firework from her booby like ' s on her firework vid . Lady G had it 1st	 
Thursday 's Photo ! Jerry , you need to stop drinking , it 's making you shrink ! 
For some reason i feel like getting drunk tonight . bout to cop me a bottle son	 
Get laid tonight . 
Yes I am , hopefully till tomorrow	 
Tomorrow is a big day for me wish me luck	 
well , first it 's Mexico and then it 's PORTLAND  	 
today is really my la'cousin birthday ! my dude getting old 3	 
Day off tomorrow , so have elected to be a scutter retire with less than clean hair ! I'm a rebel me .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Off to see TobyMac tonight with the Mrs . Christmas present coming to fruition .  - have fun ! Love TobyMac !	 
Busy night . Back at the hotel , really interesting talking with the coaches , players and GM 's of the Elite teams here in Sweden	 
Tomorrow is the big day ! I love u =D	 
Kobe Bryant has been selected to be an All-Star for the 13th time in a row . overrated ? SIKE .	 
i love guessing which couples are on 1st dates when i'm out . i also like guessing how many are internet dates .	 
Did anyone else cry last night during the last audition of ? ugh , so sad .	 
Super Robust Robot Hand Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 31 look at 
Everybody nigga actin up today . Smh	 
so tired holy crap . jersey shore tonight BITCH	 
After obsessions aka at THIS Tuesday lolz 
Today has been plentiful !  Stack stack stack . 
Oh no , there is no way I could . I could hardly leave my bed until today . But I am excited to get back to the hot room when I can .	 
It may not sound like much but it 's where I'm from )	 
Still waiting for by from library . After 2 months I'm 17th in line . Should get book in 2 years .	 
ill be honest . today can rot in hell .	 
Polarized cuts glare and Photochromatic automatically adjusts tint when exposed to the sun . sponsored 
Welp . There goes having the scarf , gloves , hat , and blanket since we're not going Saturday . 
Never do anything clever on a Friday afternoon .	 
He 's supposed to be a regional mgr . who acts just like Michael . Tonight Ricky Gervais makes a cameo the start .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Sounds like tomorrow will be awful in . Authorities beefing up , Internet and mobile networks down . War against the people . 
Kim 's Bliss Flow Level 1 Class is packed ! Come join us for her HOT class tonight at 7:30 ! See you on the mat !	 
Former energy CEO named oilsands watchdog - Toronto Sun 
i should start studying for my aps exam tomorrow and start that essay , i'm not even tryna fail .	 
yep it is^^ good morning or shall i say over here good afternoon^^	 
I am a guest speaker at the Brooklyn Educational Opportunity Center 's Family Unity Event on Saturday Feb . 5th from 10am-1pm . All are invited	 
Brown stew chicken , homemade mashed potatoes and corn tonight and dinner 's almost ready ! yes !	 
! [CDATA[This may surprise you , however there is something well loved	 
no class tomorrow ! !	 
Oh it 's cool . I had already planned on crying tonight . 
Half Way Through Al Gore 's Decade To Doom Five years ago today , Gore said we only have ten years to . 
The Cano special was very good . With that said , I'm ready for the season to begin . Hurry up , March 31 ! . .	 
viver de frente pro mar 	 
Cannonball Most recent in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 31 look at 
If the information blackout is not lifted before the Friday prayers , then you must say a prayer for Egyptians . God .	 
GREAT board meeting today . Now the conference committee is have their meeting . So excited for the future of ! 
waiting to go out later tonight	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
same . I have to go next thursday . I don't want to I hate them	 
thanks John ! It was a bit of a fright in the night . quite far down though 
AccuWeather says we're supposed to get 0.5 inches of snow tomorrow and Saturday . Blech .	 
FREE On tap . . Looks like no Picks tonight , but that can always change	 
So yall really think we having school tomorrow ? :/	 
Coaching nuggets ? Got the one 's back in November i think it was ? Hoping for more !	 
. Demonstrations to start at at least 7 mosques in cairo , 3 churches . Then march to tahrir	 
Its that time of night where i start getting silly ideas .	 
how could you follow your aust day punch article with comments on foreign aid budget reallocation this morning ? disappointed .	 
have a REALLY bad cavity . Couldn't get a root canal scheduled until the 17th , so they've got me on Vicodin until then	 
March 29th but until then go watch ' s new video ft . Too Short .	 
Can anyone link me to where I can watch a free episode of uk skins that just premiered today ? Help an American out .	 
Over 35,000 meals packed tonight for Feed My Starving Children ! God is good !	 
New tonight ! Heard Damon cries !. Now I think vampires are sexy . Badass Vampire that cries ? That might just be sexier .	 
you feel like paradise , and I need a vacation tonight .	 
we like to sleep all day , and party all night .	 
Make sure you get your tickets for SKRILLEX for Feb . 1 before they sell out ! 
" Be aware of those lurking closest to you , they may appear as a friend that 's close knit , but are nothing more than an a foe an associate "	 
taiyou no uta , song to the sun	 
Mingo 's back-to back lay-ups pushes the lead to 21-11 with 8:25 left in 1st half .	 
do you guys have live music tonight ?	 
Off to sleep night all	 
GREAT board meeting today . Now the conference committee is have their meeting . So excited for the future of ! 
No cooking dinner for me tonite	 
What are you doing for Friday night drinks in tonight ? How about $50 inc food , drinks show 
I have the final MMM in thumbs since yesterday	 
will you be part of the House Show on Febuary 5th ?	 
". it tells you never be afraid . when somewhere in your heart you can feel the glow a light to keep u warm when the night winds blow " 3	 
The DHS color coded Terror Threat Warning system was retired today . Replaced by nightly Interpretive dance routines .	 
What happens if comes down to you and Barrett in the final 2 on Sunday ?	 
Gardening in winter .As I watched the news this morning and saw how much snow places like New York has gotten , . 
No school tomorrow , so an entire extra week off . Fuck yes .	 
Usability Evaluation Testing Training Workshop - 13 April 2011 In this one day interactive workshop , learn va . 
cleaning the shit out of my room tonight , feels refreshing	 
New Club Penguin Times Issue Hi Their Penguins ! Today a new Club Penguin Times issue was released ! . 
a big thank you to everyone that submitted entires for today 's contest - we'll announce the winner in a few minutes ! 
feeling so sleepy every morning . how i miss my bed ) :	 
Fun night . dinner and a movie with and now it 's time for some minds .	 
What to do on a Thursday ? Hang with and eat pizza and watch 
Th Egyptian National TV was broadcasting cartoons today . 
job fair out in port washington next tuesday . I'm all over it .	 
On em . i love this sond . did it on em . i was the first one in target to buy the album on Nov . 23	 
Web Usability Training Course - 12 April 2011 Introduction to User Centred Design tools and techniques - one da . 
Worked on the edit mode animations and the last feature for 1.1 . 0 today . That should be all . 	 
With a great 6th end for Epping they take the game in the 8th against Corner 6-5 
i really want her to say something else to me tonight , i will turn this motherfucking house out	 
umm ppl who go to HP do any of u no if we hav school tomorrow if do pls reply thank u	 
The Dark Side of Chocolate and Child Slavery The darkish side of chocolate and child slavery . Today , what do th . 
That awkward moment where you're in the cafeteria by yourself , waiting for late night .	 
yes . but you're prob . overqualified as well as being honest what 's your 3rd strike ?	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
I realized today , I am honestly terrified of being ignored .	 
delay on a friday ? 
The Coen brothers the cartographers of cinema  
I may be nice to some people , but I choose not to be fake and show my hatred towards .http://yearbook.com/a/zdluo	 
lol thanks . i had an internship interview today so i was trying to go for the " distinguished " look lmao	 
I may not like the things my father has done but i appreciate and love him dearly for instilling in me the  
I wish tomorrow could be the first day of SUMMER !	 
It hurts the lonely one tonight ? Hahaha	 
Interaction Design Training Course - 29-30 March 2011 This two-day course will explore a range of tools , method . 
In the day i study . In the night i hunt for chicks . I guess that makes me nokturnal . B	 
Check out ya boys from at my shoot today ! 
if tht little midget scores on Friday I'm gonna be pissed	 
everybody go follow my newest girl she'll keep yo TL jumpin nd have u in stitches before the night is over = D	 
Look , I don't watch American Idol . But tonight I will because Huntsville native and Auburn man will be featured . 
Woot Woot-Do you wanna get together tomorrow around 2:30 ?	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:22 17 PM	 
I'm going to watch sana may slot sa Friday	 
11-10-2007 Most recent in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 35 look at 
nope :D not until March so I have time to prepare the costume hehe otherwise i'd be so screwed cos I've nothing !	 
U wouldn't happen 2 have a song U'd like 2 sing 4 offertory Sunday , would U ? Would B most helpful ! Let me know~	 
He was outed in a Uganda newspaper weeks ago . Yesterday he was murdered 
Fourth and final show this week until July . at least it 's front row 3	 
My lil friend gone now I can take a nap hell might be sleep for the rest of the night who knows lol !	 
so my opinions on zack novak may change in a few hours .	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Entries open for ' BtoB 's ' Social Media Marketing Awards Marketers and agencies may submit entries for the best . 
February 26 - come on down to the Bay for a good cause ! 
have a good time Cher  are you seeing the boys today ? X	 
Moved files from one folder to another on my Android OS phone today . Fuck you Apple !	 
Charlie Sheen story pretty crazy . We have it on tonight at 7 and 11:30 . and .	 
Knowledge is the frontier of tomorrow .	 
Awful snow now away n Scotland . Buried in snow from last night 's blizzard ? Build your TARDIS . 
SO Bummed I missed the event !. Had a rocking chili dinner last night ! 
After the first day of painting . Let 's just after today  there is a bit more . pink . the middle bui 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
It 's part of a simple shutdown process now , isn't it ? Shut off communications is what late-night machine gun fire used to be .	 
Saturday right around da corner fam	 
Why can't you guys just read my mind ? I have thought some crazy stuff today remembered none of it .	 
I need moves for tomorrow	 
Too many requests / If it 's not a priority / I'll just tell you " No " -- Haiku - feeling grouchy today	 
off to NSO and DFA for my baby 's passport today .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Sorry bday man , I must pass on the party tonight . I'm ill . Have a drink for me .	 
So . Never say never is only showing in theaters one day ? Bcs it says in the commercial " only showing February 11th ." o . o	 
Dammit , today you're all fail full cream not skim milk , no sugar and bagel has so little cream cheese I can't split in half . Ugh	 
Looking to get the best rates available ? Ask Helen Peppard how . Simply log onto www.hpequityhelp.com today !	 
Interesting Egyptians brace for Friday protests as internet , messaging disrupted Hours ahead of what are expected t . 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
never thought this day would come so soon . RIP Jazzy , I love miss you . you may only be my dog but you will always be my baby .	 
2011 is off to a great start , coming up in Feb we have Open Mic nights stating Feb 5th Last Exit in Tacoma an the Rosi .	 
Oh dang jus realized I'm on my 4th redbull of the day and still have one in my possession whoa ! Dunno why but it jus iz !	 
I can't wait tonight new episode of and 
Yay I don't work until next Wednesday 	 
I'm gonna miss after the Super Bowl . I'll be looking forward to August .	 
watching jeopardy for the 4th time this week . New record !	 
Three STEP 's a NEWBIE should take to get started today and the missing step you mustn't skip == 
yeah that 's so stupid . Christian 's been trying and Chaz just started today and Justin is like BAM . Tweeting for Chaz .	 
I'm not in the mood for school today but I can't afford to skip another lesson .	 
I think I'm gonna watch The Vampire Diaries instead of Idol tonight .	 
Thankyou ! My new necklaces arrived in the mail today and they are as beautiful as expected . Yay , big love Xx	 
Let 's help her out guys {) " today 's my sweet 16 . i have 503 followers , can you .	 
lol . about to watch again . this is my 3rd time . gotta love it  .	 
99% of People today CANT WATCH this video for a lot more than 25 secs ! 
you may have to do the tags solo dolo	 
talk dirty to me{a shout out to my friend joe } Most viewed in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 37 look at 
portal 7 stew starting tomorrow . Safe travels .	 
her first ever exams starting tomorrow poor thing	 
Next Friday , Feb . 4th it 's ON when The Queen of Ivory Soul competes in the next round of You've Got Talent ' Join us ! htt .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
sounds like it will get especially intense right after Friday prayers tomorrow in Cairo  
ps . Sorry if I was rude yesterday	 
Chinese new year in next week , but i still have classon that night , what a pity !	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at . January 27 , 2011 , 5:30 pm	 
Japan Household Spending Plunges In December 
This afternoon im going to get my passport picture done so i can go to Australia !  hope its not ugly :/	 
I considered stripping my Freshman year . If you're good you can make $500 a night ! 
 tmrw friday ! happy ! happy happy !	 
I wanna go out to eat tomorrow or Sat --- Where we goin ?	 
rescheduled a call today I had with gentleman in charge of teleco in emea back in the day .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Gardening in winter .As I watched the news this morning and saw how much snow places like New York has gotten , . 
" God bless the child that can hold his own " - J Cole " In The Morning " 
Heights 5 SOUTH slow from Main to Rosecrans . NORTH slow from Valley View to Pioneer and again from the 10 to 4th St . 
morning . Good luck . Jesus bless you .	 
This is probably the best thing you'll see anywhere on the internet today 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Today should be a good day . happy friday tweeps	 
My mom told me I need to get a life .  Haha I told her I'd go up in the morning and come down that evening and that I'd pay !	 
I'll be thinking of you . Im off to the dentist this afternoon too	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you love you love yous2s2s2s2s2s2s2	 
I actually missed twitter  today lol . Tomorrow 's gonna bloww	 
call and sign up for our Feb 19th class 540-775-7775	 
No treats or cookies for Ninja Puppy then and maybe even the mantle of Terrorist Puppy back for today too .	 
cool not sure he 's appreciate a phone call at this time but tomorrow if i remember .	 
Man i hope coach didnt do one of those surprise class checks tonight lol	 
How did the show go today ?	 
all my shows are on today thank god for my DVR	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
All your eggs in the T-T job basket ? Build a bigger basket . Conscious Career Course starts Feb 1 
Jazz Mafia brunch at Orson was fantastic today ! Thanks for coming y'all 
Feeling SAD ? Coping when the sun goes away - Health - Mental health - msnbc.com via 
Game on ! I am headed to Metro Supervisor-in-Training class February 22 , this year of our Lord . Thank you Jesus all who've prayed .	 
Buzz for Twin River - RI Mentoring awards event . An evening of fun and recognition at Twin R .	 
just got this sweet toy today thanks .	 
Beautiful sunset tonight !	 
Officials investigate delay after 911 call from cell phone - Allentown Morning Call 
~Thursday~ - Today was pretty good compared to yesterday . I completely ignored One Snakebite ( who still . 
Bet ya I know some people excited for Jersey Shore tonight	 
Good Morning everyone ! It 's Showtime later !	 
Is It A Good Idea To Microwave Old Spice Body Wash ? Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 40 look at 
Pops works tonight . what to do	 
Look forward to the sun and let the shadows fall behind you . Xoxo	 
let me know if we need to cancel tomorrow	 
NEW YORK CITY ! a&r is playing a show tomorrow with amazing Australian band Cassette Kids . Arlene 's Grocery at . 
review for last night 's super tight show 
Xi chi singing to tonight ! Can't wait !	 
happened to me yesterday lmao	 
Here 's a clip of Alex Reymundo on Good Morning America . Catch him on Latino 101 tomorrow night at 9pm on Si TV .	 
is going to be filled with beautiful ladies tomorrow ;D	 
I want the Sims 3 night life !	 
Hooray ! I have finished my 3rd assignment and it is only half past midnight - a vast improvement from my mad 5.30 am finish 2 days ago .	 
. Morning !. Starting with . if there were no word . no way to speak . I would still hear you . " My Valentine " 
Today my shoot was cancelled due to the snow , so my guy grabbed a camera and played my " photographer " haha 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
yes . End of Feb . Quality conference . Here is a link to this year . 
Little birdy told me that PM Gillard will b in Swan Hill today and then out Speewa . I'm. 
they would tell us bout all the naughty things u did last night ?	 
the parking lot should be interesting tomorrow I can't wait	 
is now boarding , please be advised that we may have a layover at that time	 
Nash  . Coaches vote 4 reserves .	 
Ne me quitte pas , mon cher	 
How fast should I go tonight ?	 
We may both talk a good game , but the difference between you me is I can back up what I say .	 
These comedians r on beef today And fuck The game how the fuck u gangster but u get a butterfly tatted on yo face	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
My bad it 's no report but it 's going to snow tomorrow lol	 
you don't mess with this fandom . Friday will be very depressing !	 
im shitty my moms came back today ;(	 
So awesome we have 8,705 followers but how do we fit u all in the 350 cap . room for our local show tomorrow nite ? .	 
Family guy ! That'll do for tonight 	 
I know ! I know ! Tell her I'll see her this sunday though ! " amen "!	 
White Paper - Market Research and Social Media in the 21st Century 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
There 's only 3 pairs of tix left for ' s Fake Film Festival Gala tomorrow night ! Next chance to win before 6pm !	 
lols RIGHT ! smh ima have another 1 tomorrow cause they said they loved my quiz lol	 
Yum . I'm thinking of having some tomorrow . Got more chickpeas soaking now 	 
For future reference a Punk Rock Warlord doesn't sit downstairs on a double decker bus . I saw you ages ago sat near t'driver.	 
we've got a problem . My MacBook said goodbye today . Unless apple wanna help me I need 2 bags ! Lol !	 
Working all night and missing Idol = lol	 
Tilapia for dinner tonite so I keep thinking of CROOKED LETTER CROOKED LETTER , because I'm definitely a " seat-belt wearing tilapia eater ."	 
haha you can order that every morning hun  which is it to be , Heat mag or you more up market 	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Bailey named to 10th Pro Bowl 
Is pretty excited ! Booked a fantastic cruise for Feb 2012 ! 	 
I can't wait until refinancing commercials are off the radio . Mortgage refinances may drop 77% by 2012 via 
He walk in the night ? now you should come to Brazil	 
it all depends on the promoter it 's a mixed crowd and when I mean mixed I don't mean racially . It also depends on the night .	 
Practice was SO good today ( :	 
FEBRUARY is a big month for us - we have our debut album dropping 2/15 , we have shows lined up to give the PEOPLE . h .	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 215	 
went to the gym for the first time tonight . Done almost 2 hours , so ill be fucked tomorrow L	 
YAY researched Phebe is her 1st Cousin once removed . When my new granddaughter arrives , those 2 baby girls will be 2nd Cousins !	 
someone bought four drawings off me on ebay on the 28th of december and didn't pay . he has now said he can't afford them cos he had to .	 
Imma play tonight , in need of a distraction	 
sleepy , I'm worried I may not last until that point .	 
in liquid on a THURSDAY . Everyone in ipswich is a fucking moron .	 
fun times with today ! 	 
Daniel Fast Date Night ! Gonna gonna go make goo-goo eyes at over dinner DF menu . 
Bernie 's office has compiled a photo gallery from today 's Social Security meeting . 
Wrapping up work on an as yet untitled straight up old school electro jam for next Monday 's release .	 
" Moment 4 Life " video premieres at 7:54 pm on MTV . So proud of my wife , seems like yesterday we were hugging the Yo Gotti video shoot lls	 
You bring the vanilla ice cream , you may partake . 
thinks that i should pay her cause she 's gotten undressed so many times today	 
Its Thursday but it feel like Friday .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Janette Barth 's bashing of industry may be the most intellectually dishonest evening I've ever sat through . 
Post updated January 28 , 2011 - New York recent news . Read it now at 
Ask in the Lords name and you shall receive . I have received so much from Him today that it blows me away	 
Blame Truth 's Black Ops Stats and Classes - 1-25-11 Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 42 look at 
got my done for tonight .	 
When she saw Auntie had on pearls today , she INSISTED that she had her own too !. ;-) 
FINALLY GOT SOME INTERNET ! Left my phone at home if you need to contact me email me . My apologies for any confusion I may have caused .	 
southside for the night !	 
Big Live is gearing up for an exciting February with tons of films with fascinating hosts .	 
AA taking mic . Suddenly opinion is important in Toronto after ranks team 4th in prospects	 
Yeap . Ever since I got home this afternoon I did nothing but download my favorite series and watch them . And wait it to finish . Read ! 
No school tomorrow 3	 
News Corp . to launch iPad newspaper Wednesday Rupert Murdoch 's News Corp . is planning to launch The Daily , the . 
Haha my hair !  Our friends had a special visitor 2 their offices today ! .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Does idol come on tonight ?	 
Just followed . 2 of my favorite follows have RT'd her today . 
First ever OS trip - LA riots . Recently , me in London then Paris . Now parents are in Egypt . I fear we may actually CAUSE them !	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Bud Adams is one crazy . He may eventually give Al Davis a run for his money .	 
Persistant coughing is making live band karaoke tomorrow unlikely . boo !	 
and i are watching " Buried " tonight ! 
Kinda anxious for my second interview tomorrow at Nordstrom 
Things may not happen in my time but if i pray I know God will see that this is something I want more than anything and guide me	 
Who went surfing today for 3 hours ?!?! Me me me me me me !	 
It 's suppose to snow again tomorrow i doubt that we gon have skool	 
I hope the swim team , and basketball team , and hockey team are kicking butt tonight ! 
The love of my life leaves sunday . Im so sick .	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
Hey everyone sorry I havent been on much today ! To make up for it I will do a new offer tomorrow ! So keep a look out for it ! -Jess	 
i was just there today . - . - but ok !	 
BTW American Idol comes on again tonight ! Hope you enjoy watching it ! Cause i'm gonna watch it ! :D	 
Yeah my 4th period study hall be chalked cuz I never go I just go to other teachers classrooms ! Lol	 
Next Thursday , Feb 3rd , everyone is welcome to both Jiu-Jitsu classes . We will do tournament review help with any problems .	 
yea , you're lucky lol . They cleared campus as soon as it stopped snowing last night .	 
Totally long day at work . but time to hit the books Social Pych calling my name ! Have to let the DVR do its job tonight !	 
Thought for the day . Liam appreciates gypsy weddings more than decent movies . dont we all :' ) Night ! 3	 
watching a ustream from last night with 
Today me and Hannah were sittin in class and she got her foot stuck in da basket and so I wuz helping her get it out and got mine stuck lol	 
Nice Here 's my outfit today for 
Is there anyway i can get you to be my date to my Sweet 16 on Sept . 3rd . that would be so GREAT ! Add me for more info . Love ya	 
Lmfao oh I had the French exam yesterday  it was easy , and oh really ? Haha my teacher taught us too much - . -	 
And I come out live in the night time .	 
Two bitches came and check me today that crazy	 
i'm confirm the tickets na ja and will call to meet her friend . i think her friend'll be at SG today .	 
Fuck around and b all night . finna eat and watch . Hope she learn her lesson .	 
I don't care if monday 's blue . tuesday 's grey and wednesday too . thursday I don't care about you . It 's friday I'm love .	 
Somebody said I look like Will Smith today . I get that once a month -__-	 
i dont feel like doing this hw ; imma do it ; put on my pjs and call it a night	 
Hello Friday ! Why sure I will greet you with a run . 
Taking a closer look at the Zen Coding Project on think it may turn out to be time-saving reading .	 
I got short sleep last night . I'm not released stress and tiredness .	 
I'm really fired up about my new role at Quicken Loans . I got some good info on it today . Officially it starts February 1st .	 
I saw some who looked like you last night ., in my dreams	 
May this day be an offering of love poured out before You on the altar of my life . 	 
St . Lawrence market on a Thursday afternoon is a beautiful thing .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
I bet all 700 were in Paterson , motherfuckers dont know how to drive here . Wow . 700 car accidents in last night .	 
" U gon have to come back tomorrow , that 's the day I talk to hoes !"	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
[ Instead of buying , donate to charity today ] I cleaned out my closet ; now the Goodwill has a new collection of skeletons .	 
Discovery May Explain Why Brain Cancer Is So Hard to Treat  
Would you smash it ? Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 45 look at 
A small warm up - moved alot of snow to get ready for the storm coming in tomorrow . Took a few happy pills for the pain . Home alone .	 
This morning 's celeb spot Michael K . Williams aka Omar from The Wire on my carriage of the F train	 
promises release of Palin emails by May 31 
We served 110 customers tonight , which bodes well for the weekend -- we were 4 of those . quattro salumi sticky-toffee ! Yum	 
Lady Gaga releases new song lyrics By Alison Maxwell , USA TODAY Good news for Little Monsters everywhere Lady . 
New name picked tomorrow !  for a chance to win $ 100.00 USD ! .	 
You heard right . is going to be LIVE at Much on Tues Feb 1 - right here on ! Check out their Twitter .	 
. fingers crossed for tuesday 's panic at the disco show at the bowery ballroom . no more snow , pretty-please .	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Good Night Everyone . sweet dreams to those who need them :D XOX	 
- should be it was delicious ! Loll and also tuesday I'm getting my herr done it you still wabba come !	 
Protest planned in Sunday at 12:00 outside the Egyptian Embassy in Madrid . 
Be ready for a UNC-Asheville appearance on ESPN tonight . John Williams with a nasty 
Lazy days are the best . I'm planning one for Saturday .	 
yesterday i thought about the days i didnt have a car , and i would either walk or skate around to get to my destination .	 
WATCH ME ! Most viewed in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 46 look at 
who was the 1st person to decide it was cool to drink breast milk from a cow -- 
moms goin to new orleans tomorrow aint even tell me until jus now . smh thats cole . lol	 
we dont have school tomorrow braahahh	 
On a better note . class is cancelled for me tomorrow	 
that I presented in front of the whole school today without fainting . Mission Accomplished .	 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
We listen to songs ' til five in the morning and fall asleep to it just because it reminds us of you .	 
Jan 27th ya it 's the old man 's birthday come wish Tracy a Happy Birthday tonight . We have famous Dave 's Chef's. 
Have you seen the Friday clips ?	 
im starting my 1st acting class next month ! hoot , hoot !*)))	 
I think I'm the only person who didn't get the team joans gift today . Boo .	 
The Sankrant-themed goodies box arrived from India today . Heaven .	 
Wow I fell off on my tweets today . Sorry everyone who cares .	 
LinkedIn files for IPO Business social network LinkedIn filed for an initial public offering late Thursday , off . 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of l . 
My Balls -  Most viewed in Save-Youtube today update 18:30 47 look at 
wake up in the morning . when I see the sun is shining . I wish this is my happy day roots N boys - Happy day 
Amazing ! Welcome to TO ! and I have been discussing a rendezvous for tomorrow night . Are you in or are you in ?	 
i may b bad but im perfectly good it -Rhianna	 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life o . 
I'd be a miracle if we didn't have school tomorrow ( :	 
good luck with your event tonight !	 
Imma just go get a tattoo tomorrow ?	 
At " Sesame Street Live " with the family tonight . I last did this 14 years ago when I worked a home for severely disabled kids . Will be fun .	 
yup bey was PROMOTING today lol	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
Right , off to bed now . Only one more day of random numbers - then off for a week . Good night , all !	 
u are all off today baby !	 
well I'll feel better tomorrow so I'll be at school for sure . Where do you wanna go ?	 
Wow , viewer Karl will match every donation  up to $2500 ! Donate here 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 216	 
Is ch 23 notes due tomorrow ?	 
i really want to see some fully rotated 3/3s tonight ! 
Can't wait for next thursday with freddo !	 
Today is your day ! Your mountain is waiting . So - get on your way . ~ Dr Seuss	 
cozy , I was in a suit all morning , jealous !	 
Microsoft Earnings Top Estimates Microsoft shareholders may not be impressed ( the company 's stock has been a li . 
someone said that to me today lol	 
everybody go follow my newest girl she'll keep yo TL jumpin nd have u in stitches before the night .	 
I got new glasses today .	 
2-Tone Submariner Blue Ceramic with Cloned Movement just released ! Get the most in demand replica today ! 
Yes , I will post the link later , I have to go fix food ! LOL HAve fun tonight with Emz , I will try to get in , 6 my time ?	 
Just saw a huge spider outside the station . Didnt realize it warmed up that much today . Is he lost ?	 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
Your luck has been completely changed today - thank you fortune cookie	 
Imma really need to get me some money for february , lots of good movies comin out	 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
LinkedIn IPO On the Way Update From the LinkedIn blog LinkedIn Corporation announced today that it has filed . 
What We're Reading | Can a Man Be a Feminist ?. and Why that Question Is Relevant Today via 
RUMOR J Allard Heading To Skype Former Xbox visionary J Allard may be ready to end his life of leisure by taki . 
man im in need to hit up my team and see what they doing tomorrow cause the house is 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I love how I always feel sick at the WORST possible times . Only 3 more hours of school tomorrow though , then I'm free for 2 days .	 
I think I had food poisoning , and had to take me to the ER early this morning . Feeling better now , just resting .	 
A dollar today is worth 2$ tomorrow . finance 360	 
R u ready 4 tonight ? Im fina try find sum new videos for us	 
hooray ! no work for me tomorrow ! who wants to play ?	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
what do we tweet tomorrow ?	 
haha true , I do sound like you . The 7am start yesterday put me in a bad mood . Yay for Friday .	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
QT I tweeted so much this Morning i dont got nothin to Tweet about . me either really so ima just talk shit . lol	 
- I am all about the " crickets " as well . Just came back today to see all the Jimmer craziness .	 
Think I may treat myself to red lobster 
most days i love that nigga but some days im like fuck that nigga . today is a fuck that nigga day .	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  htt .	 
OMG that woman just won a starting salary tonight 
thanks limocarorlando.com 4 giving away a NIGHT ON THE TOWN 4 's Day 
I am really debating on whether I should wear this tutu tomorrow . I feel like a big ass pink flamingo in it -__-	 
with that said , i completed 6 beats today . 
I hope y'all keep me entertained tonight.I'm gonna need it	 
New Blog Post Weekly Kids Club at The Florida Aquarium in February 
I most def hit u up today . smh	 
Illinois Supreme Court keeps Emanuel on ballot The Illinois Supreme Court ruled Thursday that former White Hous . 
Illinois Supreme Court keeps Emanuel on ballot The Illinois Supreme Court ruled Thursday th . 
friday ! friday , friday , friday ! FRIDAY ! I can't wait for tomorrow !	 
Yes YE 's Retreat is this Saturday BUT Aftershock is THIS FRIDAY , Tomorrow ! SO it should be your priority ! Step Out invite someone !	 
1255 today . Then my kids spun me in my chair . Now I think I'll puke . 
Chapter 13 - The next day , I slept in till nearly 2pm after staying up till nearly 5am in the morning . 
The City of Chicago is a 3rd World cesspool you deserve you're sick puppy Mafia types like Rahm i send dead fish to your house Emanuel .	 
' What may seem upside down to us is right side up to God .' - ODB	 
i just pressed them up yesterday . if i gotta mail them or something . dont know when ill be in l.a. it might be a few months .	 
18 on Saturday . =) . to bad this doesnt mean anything to my parents .	 
All good , there . But if you want serious group action saunas are amazing . My 1st ever cock was a Geordie , BTW	 
Lmao , wait yall juss asked me to come by him tomorrow , I said no , he said I got food fat ass I know yu like that . I hate that boy .	 
we did wend we play them again next Tuesday senior night	 
Thanks Mike . I'm going to think of a couple more questions and hit you up tomorrow morinig	 
Haha my hair !  Our friends had a special visitor 2 their offices today ! .	 
My 1st solo album " People Hear What They See " will be available on later this year . Are you as excited as I am ?	 
lmao come on now ! This is all jus wishful thinking by you ! Lol the are the Best there is ! You will c tonight !	 
Tell somebody you love them today ! They will feel special 8~)	 
u said u hated this guy on jan . 25	 
Can we pretend that airplanes in the night are like shooting stars ? I could really use a wish right now .	 
i always do my 's after 5pm , because that means it 's friday in every country . mhm .	 
I wish it was June 3rd	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
How the fuck do we have class tomorrow ?! Is it posed to snow anymore tonight ?	 
So if canada is airing collateral on Sunday does that mean it will be on the net ? 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at . January 27 , 2011 , 5:30 pm	 
this is my 3rd poem to right this week ? for school anyway haha 	 
Don't think I'm seeing Chase saturday :[ As usual .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite -- 
busy but good snow stopped in the morning	 
Look what came in the mail today ! It 's 110 years old . 
Yay sun . It 's all overcast here .	 
I was at the crib cuz I ain't have a ride . no 1 hit me that night , Justin n them faded smh	 
Evening shags . Now at Disney . Whole air transit experience was surprisingly efficient . Now have a Cadillac . End Sit Rep .	 
my head is swore from yesterday . 
let 's try to get over 2000 followers tonight . follow !	 
estamos aqui na saturday 's 	 
fun day today w 
Soak up that warm sun while you can , people !	 
Tomorrow is the final day of my charity water fundraiser 20% of proceeds from sales being dona .	 
In a month you won't remember what I said today .	 
shuddup idiot , it 's snowy . we had a blizzard last night .	 
Our teenage vows in a parking lot , till tonight do us part .	 
If the circumstances are right , you can count on the US Government shutting down the Internet as Egypt did today .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Schools closed in Philly again tomorrow . Go make snow angels and gross snowmen , kids . 
glad to see my lil brotha feeling better too . His birthday tomorrow ! 
I really really really want to take class today , but I've got the runs . Oh nos 	 
just got my 50 votes in . night all !	 
Hole out for par from 108 yards in the rough at Torrey Pines South par 4 7th 
Morning  mandi soon .	 
finally feeling good enough to go for the half day we have tomorrow	 
watching tuesday night 's one tree hill , funniest episode ever	 
Woke up early morning to spent time with God but I started fishing as I chat with God . So I shout , " sleepiness get out !" am refreshes !	 
I will ! ( are we doing 1st person who 's each tweet ?	 
wouldn't it feel good if all night i was in you	 
I just had the craziest experience in the Giant on 14th St . Smh .	 
That girl had me cracking up today down syndrome	 
cuz he 's DOPE ! This rap demon has possessed me today . I have been playing Biggie in my iPod all day	 
Got an email today from the SPAM loan officer LOL now that is a new one !	 
Any specials tonight ?	 
will watch space jam as soon as i wake up tomorrow morning . fuckin a !	 
Friday is rainy . 	 
So who n da tonight ?	 
, said she didn't go to the mall . lol and let 's go to Open Mic Night .	 
Yes only 2 day of school this week , I'm happy . Now if he could only make my night I would be one happy camper	 
That BS at the U of M , aint it tomorrow ?	 
alternative has gone live today Good luck !	 
shout out to zohaib 's dad , may god bless him :D	 
Tonight is gonna be a good night in Atlanta .	 
I found 10 bucks at the hospital today that was legit	 
Have Breakfast with the Candidates on Feb 1st ! Q&A with Channel 8th . Tickets can be purchased by visiting www.tampachamber.com	 
We love BOF . Check out there exclusive from today . 
I don't have class tomorrow !.	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
It 's sunny it 's Margarita Thursday ! Stop in and get a regular Margarita for $ 5.99 . 
I am loving all of your gorgeous food photos today ! Awesome ! 
Omg I say Olivia today haven't seen her since forever !	 
Just so you know , I will judge you by how much you cover Egypt tonight . Palin says something stupid every week .	 
wake up now ! =) go to work now . Can't wait help my fren selling cloth at gaya street tonight~ part time~ xD	 
wats on tv tonight ?	 
I had never heard of it till the 2nd one came out .	 
I'm gonna have to get creative with dinner tonight . Beef fettuccine , maybe ?	 
hope today better than tomorrow .	 
hey soul sister ! aint that Mr mister on the radio stereo . I dont wanna miss a single thing you do tonight .	 
love is like being drunk 1st its great and all is well then comes the crash and all is not well .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Date tonight . On about 2 hours of sleep and haven't showered in two days . Yeah , this should go well . 
performing at The Office tonight ! it 's gonna be live ! 
ladies 1st ! I wanna be a Gentleman about the situation	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Every girl deserves a guy to talk to at night	 
it 's mine and b-day today would really love it if you could make our day with a b-day .	 
HOLY SHIT ! I just tried on my size 30 board shorts that havent fit me in 2 years . AND THEY FIT ! Not done yet tho ! Miami Vol 1 in March !	 
Just got my M&G for Saturday 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 217	 
Guys , tomorrow ! I'll make a major announcement ! IF I had to be gay on an island with just one race . who would it be !	 
tomorrows friday ? yup 2nd time i've gone to school all week [=	 
I'm good . Still debating about going to Ross party tonight	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Keep pushing through . Joy comes in the morning .	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  htt .	 
bro i rolled one yesterday the mother fucker smoked for 20 minutes	 
yeah helped my cousin sister today	 
Lol ok so Thursday it is !	 
RIP Jeffrey Quarter The 2nd died to a severe heart attack 	 
I may have posted this before . but it makes me so happy  
Encounter Youth this Friday at the Kings Centre - Be there 
Miss seeing you out in the " country " tonight ! 
, ryan got first place in the 100 yard freestyle tonight	 
I would go but I'm not at school tomorrow so it would be slot of hassle and I'm sick 	 
tomorrow gonna be ass . the next day . the next day	 
3rd winter break , bet .	 
The female may not be with you very much , but her affections are steadfast and you are always on her mind .	 
Market looks great , I was Amazed at the amount of roles advertised in the Waikato Times yesterday !	 
Today is gonna be the day That they're gonna throw it back to you By now you should've somehow	 
we didn't until there was an 11 snow day year that pushed Graduation to almost July . Since then they've changed policy .	 
announcing their lineup on Tuesday	 
Sunset is at 5pm today ! That means from here on out , it 's still daylight when I leave work !	 
Leaving tonight to go to the funeral 
So , I keep on walking ' til the sun comes up .	 
magic . So looking forward to Sunday in Glasgow .	 
Ate Church 's Chicken yesterday for the 1st time in 6 years . As soon as I had it , it felt like it had me 0_o 
The Perfect Dinner Table When event designer Preston Bailey entertains at home , he strives to keep the evening low key	 
if mike miller is a factor tonite then ill give it to you guys but with migrane wade and soft bosh away game I dunno	 
What.It 's cold today ! innocent and laughs* 
Kiwanis annual Pancake breakfast is this Saturday at McIntosh High School !	 
Today is not my day	 
i am geeking out for you . copeland and states make me cry every night	 
Today i told saade i need to start reading my bible . And the girl just called me to remind me to read my bible and give me what i must .	 
yall finna go to the game tonight	 
Help us recognize an outstanding women and female young professional for the 20th annual Athena Awards !. 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Well we`ll wait until February 6 . keep me up dated	 
Wow , has 1,956 followers  More stats at via 
My Jummah prayers will be dedicated to all those under opression . May Allah provide The People of with a triumphant .	 
On pothole patrol in the city of today . which roads do you think need the most work ?On p . 
I was in walgreens yesterday and the man behind the counter was trying to flirt with this girl until she said she needed a Plan B pill Lmao !	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
OK , off into the cold , dark snow drenched night . I hate New England today .	 
This is totes the worst night in a while .	 
Yeah definitely calling it an early night	 
Perfect Health Program starts today . We are talking about Multidimensional model of life , Element Theory ( . 
ahh nice ! Late night which maybe ? " if " they are there	 
Video of the moment of killing an Egyptian protester by Egyptian police snipper .	 
at home watching Game . Back to work tomorrow .	 
ahah . good morning . ah where are you from ? i always wondering about that .	 
Manga Out Loud from June 2010 - Just re-listened to myself on this podcast with and ,. 
Today 's shift is going by surprisingly fast ; not a bad thing tho 	 
Google is my BEST friend ! lol How is everyone doing tonight ?	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Feeling especially needy tonight , so I'm going to plug my head up into my I-pod and distract myself for a while .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Australia keen to cap lessons with 1st Asian title  Australia believes it has the form and confi . 
Cutler must be new to team sports , I guess Morrissey Bears did Cutler no favors - Chicago Sun-Times via 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I leave Tassie today . So long and thanks for all the cheese .	 
In the city . Anyone wanna hang out tomorrow afternoon ?	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  htt .	 
Vampire diaries and Nikita come on tonight	 
US officials are expecting " significant " violence in Egypt tomorrow . If so , I sure hope Obama and HRC are working the phones into the night .	 
LOL~ As a Capricorn , I may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive kind of way . 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Last Night 's TV Posh and Posher Why Public School Boys Run Britain/BBC2The Joy o . 
Today was a good day because . I was able to leave a post on my sister 's wall to wish her a Happy Birthday . Which means I am not blocked .	 
" He Walks The Night ." The first one to get it was .	 
Utah rapping pastor pleads guilty to rape SALT LAKE CITY , Jan . 27  -- A Utah youth pastor pleaded guilty . 
Walking on a dream - empire of the sun	 
Jersey shore tonight !	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
how 's ur night !?	 
BREAKING NEWS Carol Moseley-Braun may suspend her campaign for mayor of Chicago to star in the touring cast of 227 .	 
vampire diaries is bk on tonight . yay	 
Davis at night . Oh yeah . 
February 14 , 2010 my ex stood me up went with anatha girl . February 14 , 2010 my valentine will be just a Friend  - asked twice already	 
Nighty night  feel better !	 
Australia keen to cap lessons with 1st Asian title  Australia believes it has the form and confidence to ca . 
Have you checked www.IamSuperGorge.com today ? check it now and hit up with feedback	 
We will be friends ! Yeah . They crack me up . I have a funny story for you tomorrow morning !	 
took thee best nap today	 
me is very tired now so going to listen to the lords song then sleep . praise the lord for the night nurse	 
Morning too kak agnez , have a nice day ya .  Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking . Gonna	 
hi am a big fan of yours yesterday was my birthday send me a kiss please love you love you	 
it is tomorrow bud	 
How I spent my Thursday evening . The gang went to Cap Ale . Beer and appetizers were consumed . Fun was had by all . The end .	 
the grapevine has the Blewett labelling review being released today . my eyes are peeled . Anyone heard anything ?	 
Definitely can't wait to step out after work tonight .	 
' Cause i may be bad but i'm perfectly good at it 	 
Australia keen to cap lessons with 1st Asian title  Australia believes it has the form and confidence to ca . 
Sweet ! We're playing at 11 or thereabouts on the night .	 
it 's mine and b-day today would really love it if you could make our day with a b-d .	 
extended ! to win $ 100.00 USD final name and winner picked on Saturday !  .	 
I knew was gonna be mayor 1st time i seen him on TV . people think they have an actual choice . lol 
I own night~air flowing hard around my fur~my mouth bites soft flesh~ your taste drives me mad~your joy of being~brings out .	 
You have good sources ! according to my sources , is having $1 pitchers tonight , no cover . .	 
TV A Sneaky Part of the Food Pyramid Instead of uniting families , experts say , today 's ubiquitous screens are . 
Buy - by , their - there , where - we're, Too - to -two , see - sea . 2nd grade words we shouldn't be messin up in sentence .	 
night tweeters ! ( aran signing out !	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I may be bipolar	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
, how many followers you pick up since January 23rd ? Go . ----- close to .	 
- my unc was driving my car last night and saw a snowplough spin out , then we had to dig the car out of the snow .	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
my life has been a barrage of challenges my today could not be without all my yesterdays 
already set my alarm for the morning . lol 
Please ? Can it be tomorrow night ? Please please please ?	 
Working at home tonight due to grumpy boss . I pray for more happy people in my life .	 
Wanna be the last name you call late at night , first one that you dial when you open ya eyes .	 
that 's all there is to do today . lol . And tomorow -_- .	 
Matteo didn't let me sleep much last night . Coming in late for work today .	 
saw you workin the pool today haha	 
Among my accomplishments today I created a culinary masterpiece Campbell 's French Tomato Soup !	 
yesterday was my 16th birthday and my dream was for you to wish me a happy birthday , can you please make it come true ?! 	 
Have you tried Vuka before ? Come by and try it tonight at the Colorado Athletic Club ! 
Im glad I didn't bring my rotel cuz I sholl didn't see today 
Today remixing and mastering a few songs for the last time . then driving a van full of blankets and gear for to the airport	 
" i miss your tan skin , your sweet smile , so good to me , so right . And how you held me in your arms that september night the first time y .	 
I think we have the first death in history may have actually killed herself s/o to .	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
Can't wait for the vampire diaries to come back on tonight	 
A boy can kiss a girl , the sun can kiss the sky , a son can kiss his mother , but you my friend , yes you , can kiss my ass .	 
1st time I've seen it . I honestly feel knackered with all the action emotion so can only imagine what it 's like for you x	 
This may be news as big as it gets . If the Middle East erupts and affects oil supplies , that will be big .	 
Looks like I may have to tweet using text messages . gah ! 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
It 's Friday ! Gonna enjoy right after ! 	 
Well deserved day off tomorrow !	 
Instant view Pending home sales rise in December 
may just take you up on that offer . We're going out for tea but can come in the arvo . You're a lifesaver !	 
In a morning lecture of Haloperidol . someone from IOWA .	 
Purp Patron sound like a black mans to-do list when he skip church on Sunday .	 
i just wanna be where you are . pour me a shot and a j to light . honey , ima give it to you right this very night .	 
i have a huge black penis that everyone may enjoy	 
did you work today . are the kids in bed . mine are being crazy LOL	 
Eagles may soar , but weasels don't get sucked into jet engines .	 
I think I May too	 
Today is going to be a stupid day	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Our Jan . ends on the 31st so be sure to follow for your chance to ! .	 
What a night on tv - a man who lives with 100 ' love dolls ' in Japan and then someone who makes even less sense on Quest .	 
One of the people who won a board yesterday has their profile set to where we can't message them . So first person . 
New episode of the Vamp Diaries tonight . ! Watch it w/ me . PLEASE . !	 
It 's Thursday !  
bc im a bit of an asshole at times like today . and yes i know .	 
well sky+ got that one wrong . Sepang 2010 re-run it is and just watched 11th to 3rd in 3 laps	 
Candles lit in my room . mood perfectly set for a night of relaxation 	 
I want to watch Coming to America tonight	 
i'll call her later to meet me at the back gate . yeah using my brain today :D	 
" Coffee . I don't care if it 's good or bad for me . It 's just something to do in the morning ." -a friend	 
I got to call the fire department today because of an alley fire behind 7-11 near our place 	 
very excited for the party tonight ! and everyone else ! 	 
feb 4 , 2011 the palmetto 's grand opening . come out and support , and the 730 dips family as they d .	 
We at Tonight -- 
kinda looks like here . supposed to be another storm of equa intensity Tuesday . Sigh .	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 218	 
A hot one today . Thermostat in my office got to 97 degrees .	 
wow that 's pretty late . That 's about the time I go to bed on Friday .	 
is by far thee best ever ! lol she really just made my night :D	 
Wat do I do to make people like laugh at me . i jus walked up to her today and she started crakin up . smh	 
When I was doing my GCSE 's I threw up every morning . Normally , my first sign that I'm " stressed " at all is physical rather .	 
lol thanks but they were in certain sizes mine got off back order on the 23rd	 
yes ! now i can have my sleep over tonight , and my orgy tomorrow . crying tears of joy , turns on some reac .	 
I wanna free my mind demons tonight lol	 
Brick city is back on sundance this sunday let see how they portray newark this time .	 
Here 's where The Queen of Ivory Soul will be on Jan . 29th ! Check out Edmonds Winery making tasty local wines - .	 
American idol comes on tonight right ?	 
Oh no ! are both having their birthday parties on the same night.what 's a girl to do ? 
Well good night twitter you have kept me well truly entertained for the last 1/2 hour ! Gonna watch panorama then bed !D	 
According to ELPA exam writing prompts you may not pick your topic but you may pick the prompt that says you can write about any topic	 
gave it their all tonight . Wanted to party with them but now find myself in a stationary train . Rock on ?	 
Knee deep in planning for our next Disney vacation in May . Polynesian w/Deluxe Dining !	 
gotcha . been crazy today zee	 
Sleeping is proving to be rather difficult tonight .	 
So do it ! Don't even need to use my statement 	 
Alright , I got to get back to crazytown . I'm going to come back at ten if you're around . Have a good night !	 
learning yoga check , learning about fabric softener check , what will he learn tomorrow ? Ideas ? We have a week 
Move over Robert Pattinson , Dominic Cooper may be the new vampire in town Personally , I think Dominic Cooper wo . 
Here 's my outfit today for 
The TU Cultural Studies Daily is out ! Top stories today by 
I'll be doing exactly that myself next Tuesday .	 
Does anyone else hope that Damon 's tears tonight are bc Rose dies ?! . oh , no ? I'm the only one . That 's ok .	 
going to see sufjan stevens tonight , i am well excited ! also big day out yesterday was heaps of fun , thanks to everyone who saw us ! x	 
love the way this is worded , simple symbolic@iPacino Alot of women turn heads in the streets all day then toss turn in bed all night	 
and aw c'mon is contagious ! forget the bieber fever it 's the aw c'mon infection ! knows what im saying	 
Does an unemployed Jeff Fisher make Jason Garrett lose a little bit of sleep at night ?	 
HELP ME to make ppl wear a horn in the head on feb 13 LOL I admit it , i just had a xD 
Really hoping theres no school tomorrow lol	 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
Listened to all 3 of 's albums today ! I must say that I'm EXTREMELY proud witnessing him develop as an artist is a blessing ! 	 
Studied monotonic sequences in calculus today , all I heard was tonic , then all I could think of was gin . Home now and it 's 
oh woww they closed school for tomorrow to ? another day off from work but still get paid 
no today was boring	 
. all my evening plans are cancelled bc of the weather . the older I get , the more I love being at home !  )	 
In fact . The party at my house tonight at 10:30 be there are be no where .	 
One night while working patrol I pulled a vehicle over on the highway . I could see the husband talking to his wife and motioning with his .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
do it so good that nigga don't put me out tonight	 
going to bed now - im soo lookin forward to 5pm tomorrow 
jersey shore tonight !	 
nah u didn't see no bull ride that night ! Body shots all night ! I was dancing ode on bar ! Lol crazy night	 
I'm all set to move into my new dorm tomorrow ! SO excited !	 
What an awesome post today ! Thanks for giving me some much needed perspective )	 
Sounds like tomorrow will be awful in . Authorities beefing up , Internet and mobile networks down . War against the .	 
Today was the best day ever ! 3	 
i'm sorry ur day wasn't that great . hope tomorrow is better for u 
I used this excuse a lot when I'm late for school " I'm not Late I'm just early for tomorrow !"	 
So I can cook . Among other things domestic . but I'm ready to explore other talents I may have	 
How 's B today ? Any luck getting meds down him ?	 
I couldn't resist playing in the snow this morning ^_^	 
Yes I have dance sessons every night in my room , you should join me .	 
Guest blogger explores why social impact beats a bonus in today 's world 
Don't forget DAWAH TRAINING with Br . Yusha Evans tomorrow at the U of M ! You'll be learning from one of the most . 
thing I remember bout November Rain is that I put it on ma schools dance mixtape BACK 2 BACK IN GRADE 6	 
Hai friday ! Please be my day 	 
i may or may not be intoxicated .	 
ElBaradei returns to Egypt for Friday protests 
what on Monday  we need to talk ms vip hostess 3	 
presales are for the rave tomorrow .	 
My good friend Mark , gave me his Kellin Quinn autograph today , I love this kid BEYOND WORDS 3	 
juss tell me saturday yu wanna do the shoot ?	 
Good see'n ya last night long time ! Wishing I would have seen you on the mic , but I was late as usual !	 
Thank God tomorrow is Friday !	 
Aye hope this is the start of a good run , anyways been stopped in my quest for the radio , have my son until Mon , bt will fin .	 
Shreveport IRS office to open Saturday - KTAL 
you know you don't have to go . Monday is so you could get a metro card so that you don't have to pay Tuesday .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
True . Although I did shave today , so I'm only covered in hair .	 
Somebody turned the gravity up too high today .	 
have fun at work tomorrow , i'll be in bed ALL day , with live from orensanz .	 
Re Jessie May I second the motion ?	 
If I were in charge of an NFL franchise , I would trade a 6th round pick for Jeff Fisher 's moustache . 
off till sunday , then working 6 days then the weekend off . the joys of being the responsible one at work . if only , if only	 
Guess what . With all these snow days , I will STILL walk across that stage on June 2nd . Thank you , very much trick .	 
excited to try your Ube cupcakes next Tuesday . Do you normally sell out ?	 
Shreveport IRS office to open Saturday - KTAL 
good morning all hope this day be a better day than the day before .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Miami Heat New York Knicks  take their talents to The Garden to . Makepeace	 
Thanks for all the love for my book today , bloggers ! Much appreciated ! Stay tuned for my blog tour visit tomorrow w/ Jami . 
Oakland leading 17-16 with 10:16 rem . 1st half . Kampe just had his first outburst at home in a while . Unhappy with shot .	 
Cool ! I'll be looking forward to your course ! Try ours too , neh ? We'd be giving out prizes to the 1st 5-10 challenge winners . =D	 
Good morning to you all ka . Have a nice day na ka .	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Interesting afternoon sifting through Anonymous stuff . I have strong doubts about this group	 
good evening sexy caramel 757	 
is footie on Sunday ? Or is it a date ?	 
So cool today .	 
Last day of work till 11 Feb !  
hey do u know if Grey 's is new today !?	 
Spent today w/ and who are both SO awesome !	 
----------- forever alone tonight	 
Tonight 7 ET will appear w Bob Chapman re economy . Live video , ca .	 
Do I feel like being a " jogger " on So Undercover this Saturday , or not ? Decisions , decisions .	 
,10 years of Gratitude  write your list today .	 
how has your week been going ? Only a few more till February . I can't wait can't wait !	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking ." and got Part 5-charm Bracelet ?! Try it 
Your tea brought me much healing . Today = MUCHO BETTER .	 
Gonna be playing tonight on the show . Make sure to peep it on www.party934.com	 
at my baby 's game chillin wit my hoes . Its gonna be a good night	 
EVENING UPDATE Check out what 's coming up tonight on News at 11 with Jonathan Oh  . 
Today one of my students told her mom I'm pregnant . Guess I'm looking as fat as I feel . Lol . Having said THAT , aft . 
so excited for vampire diaries tonight i almost cant contain my excitement !	 
Today was a good day until a family friend told me that the doctor said he might have cancer , i hope he will be alright 
gonna delete it . LIKE C'MON GROW THE FUCK UP . just leave us alone , okay ? whats done is done , you screwed us over .	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 219	 
TSK ! today my dad fetch me to school , dont need to squeeze in the train~ it only took him half hour to reach sia !	 
Whose lovely faces will I be seeing tonight at Ra Ra Riot ?	 
my cough is back with full vengeance I am very tired generally blah but with PT yesterday , I feel like hell . Having .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
wish I could but I can't I got advisory 5th hour	 
I feel like today 's been a LONG day .	 
During today 's White House press briefing , Robert Gibbs said the White House believes the Egyptian government is st .	 
2nd shoot was little shorts . all legs . 
Really wants 2 watch last ep of 1 tree but am up early ! Night tweeps	 
What will tomorrow be ? Fake glasses Friday , Four Class Friday , or double midterm friday :\ all of the above ! Woo tomorrow is going to be fun	 
So , yesterday 's winners are ! I will be calling you this evening !	 
They want power . We want freedom . They have guns . We have cellphones . They're ready 2 kill . We're willing 2 die 4 bet .	 
y Wiz Khalifa weighs as much as an 8th grader . 
John 's message , received today . 	 
they'll be gone . first thing tomorrow	 
What the devil ! Why ? Bet coffee is your best mate today	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Tomorrow morning I will be on Opie and Anthony and I'm bringing . Gonna be interesting	 
people loose the ones they love everyday but will I still be fortunate to have you tomorrow ?	 
I was unusually tired today ; napped for 2 hours earlier . Hopefully I won't have any trouble sleeping tonight .	 
even if i dont im still going my friend went today and saw hannah from pll	 
On my way to skate n fun zone . Last practice before bout day Sunday ! Bad Moon Rollers gonna tear up Blood on Wheels !	 
Just finished soundcheck in Norman . Come out tonight !	 
EVENING UPDATE Check out what 's coming up tonight on News at 11 with Jonathan Oh  . 
If you're a fan of The Office , Ricky Gervais has a cameo on tonight 's episode . I hear it 's during the cold open .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I'm pretty sure the freak that put the extra ' r ' in February is the same guy who thought up the spelling for Wednesday .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Looking forward to putting a face to the emails tonight w/ Elizabeth from . 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
starting the night shift . looks like my workload is increasing rapidly this year	 
Last chance to vote . poll closes at midnight Friday !	 
Karl Hess just admitted to not knowing what the call was ? Really is the Twilight Zone tonight	 
I'm going to wear my to my math exam tomorrow , and write my exam in 3D . Wouldn't that be cool ?	 
If u are not in you buggin we going in tonight ya	 
Campaign Lunch tomorrow with Richard Bruton in Kilkenny - looking forward to it , my thanks to everybody who 's coming !	 
Okay , you're officially hated today .	 
it is their $ - just Tues . there was discussion about bringing after-care programs in-house by the BOE and residents said no 
good morning to you too . Lol .	 
Thoughts are with our peoples in it 's getting ugly over there and tomorrow is looking brutal .	 
oh , haha :D yeah . i'll make my picture maybe tomorrow or saturday twitpic it to you ( :	 
Managed not to poke myself today with a felting needle . A rare event but there 's still hours left to go	 
Working tomorrow . dread . But I'm covering Kathy so that she has a day off . So I don't mind . 	 
Will do . tomorrow 	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Rise grind for all the strippers tonite .	 
If you didn't get to see perform last night . Come to the Renaissance Hotel in next thursday .	 
Anyone wanna do mill ave tonight ?	 
Good night everybody .	 
EVENING UPDATE Check out what 's coming up tonight on News at 11 with Jonathan Oh  . 
Got a new druid tarot deck and a druid plant oracle deck today . so excited to do some learning tonight !	 
Stepping out tonight with my girls ! Follow me on twitter to see where ima be 
Got a nursing topic you'd like raised tonight on 9p/Eastern ? Submit here 
Dear old Nicki i just got your album yesterday and i love every song 3	 
top 4 seems extremely unlikely , out of fa cup . knowing you pay a massive january premium , why not quietly work on a deal .	 
Damn RIP Amazing talent and Lead character designer of G.I Joe renegade , passed away today RIP Clement Sauve 
Cool talk is over , Tune in every THURSDAY !	 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Talking to him tomorrow at 3	 
So i wont be getting my car till tuesday now	 
Is the sun really a good source of vitamin D ? How does this work ? Find out here 
If u are not in you buggin we going in tonight ya	 
lol he is recognised on Facebook . I think he may have about 25 friends on there !. il suggest to him that u said he should twitter 	 
March 29th but until then go watch ' s new video ft . Too Short .	 
You may block internet but never block will and revolutionary spirit 
Just won our 1st game down Mississippi , we 18-4 now ! Let 's go Mack ! Now I'm bout to watch my Bro play .	 
Diego 's Mexican Food and Cantina is up and running on the 16th Street Mall Diego 's Mexican Food and Cantina . 
Bones , directed by David is on tonight ! It 's going to be a good one !  .	 
look at your tweets from jan 21st 
Mmm . Rock city , ember , or Spanish club with my girls tonight . Hmm which one too decide ? . 
Gonna be a hobo and ask if I could perhaps use your shower tomorrow ? L	 
is he a happy baby today ?	 
You heard right . is going to be LIVE at Much on Tues Feb 1 - right here on ! Check out their Twitter .	 
1st night of Waynestock . Relix Variety Theatre tonight , Friday and Saturday . 10$ gets you a weekend of great music all for a good cause !	 
Shares flat as investors mull flood levy Thursday ? s closing price of $US 1344.66 . Gold specialist Newcrest Minin . 
FACT The regime in shut down the Internet in an attempt to silence the voices of the 1 million people protesting .	 
Any all-day happy hours on your calendar for February ? If so , we'd be happy to provide some DRY !  
i used numbers for letters when making my new password today . thought of you . 3	 
12th night by Shakespeare - at UCF with the girls :] 
I found out on Tuesday that Nottingham Forest had their Wembley suits measured up and ordered before beat them in pl .	 
I want the Sims 3 night life ! /// i have a when i saw that tweet , lmao . i thought it said something else	 
your brother 's birthday is February 11th too ?! Aww , well tell him I say happy birthday ! 	 
Farewell drinks for Leen and I at The Palace on Saturday night ! Come and say hello and also goodbye !	 
hehe I'll jot down tonight 's conversation topics !	 
my birthday is on saturday :D could i PLEASE get a happy bday tweet from u ? 
Regulators Ice may be factor in Ohio gas fires - WIS News 10 - Columbia , South Carolina | via 
Jet skiing in January - freezing cold , but still a lot of fun !	 
ohh , very appropriate to do FLS in feb  get wren now while on sale and make it after  
Gonna watch beyond scared straight tonight .	 
DCF Mag has picked up our " A.D. " for their 100,000 + distribution each month beginning with the March , 2011 edition ! 
No skool again tomorrow .! Oh yes lol	 
I need to guide me tonight .	 
Waiting For Tonight and Love Don't Cost A Thing are my two favorite songs from Jennifer Lopez x3	 
feck it . i need to go to bed and sleep . night dudes xx	 
HA ! I'd love to be a fly on the wall in the Burke house tonight 
OMG I cnt wait till tomorrow when I go by my moma	 
Gonna be on again around 530pm today talking Idol !	 
I believe the 1st letter is triple r	 
Tomorrow morning I shall mostly be listening to ' Talking Book ' by Stevie Wonder . Goodnight and good luck .	 
hey . I can't make it on sat . I spontaneously decided to go to Vegas !	 
NYC friends - will the Union Square Greenmarket still be fun in January ? Lots of vendors still there ? 	 
I didnt know youre a Phil Collins fan _ I can feel it coming in the air tonight . 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 220	 
Angela , you know that 's not true . Twitter has been a total bitch today for some reason . 
Send up a special prayer for nelson mandela and his family . There are so few heros of our time . May he have peace if .	 
Got a nursing topic you'd like raised tonight on 9p/Eastern ? Submit here 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
lets get em ' boys ! the office tonight 
no it 's tonight , it says so online and I just looked at the guide	 
Can yhu believe i missed tuesday by boo lovin SMH ?	 
The Stu is a charity tonight with all these free dunk and 3 point shirts being tossed out . Skeen with a monster dunk , Rams up 31-27	 
today we learned about reproduction haha dude my teacher was so willing she was like " the sperm has to go into the egg " we were like what ?!	 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours	 
Thanks to all the ppl who came out to the xab meeting today	 
I'll just go into your fridge tonight and steal some food . I still win !	 
As a your genuine tie to the past is strong and it may be something you feel you have to care for .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
am i going to swing another 100 tweets today too ? that would be like 400 in the last 2 days 	 
These roads are TERRIBLE to drive on . I got stuck every 5 feet . That HAVE to give us a delayed opening tomorrow .	 
is still insisting my package is out for delivery today . It 's 7:30 pm . I think they're lying .	 
Dieting is not easy to do until today because now we discovered tea sheds pounds 
good luck tonight against SyA .	 
I'm about to just put on some clubbing clothes and try and get in on a Thirsty Thursday kinda deal .	 
I'll pick the best question from followers ask Mike T . tomorrow at press conference tomorrow . How 's that for interactive ?!	 
Do you have a question 4 ? On Monday , January 31st , the will be struck with Bieber fever ! 
Doing morning shift today . I suddenly realized that I missed those days of taking school bus to school !	 
Damn it , I was going to have wine in a bit too . But if you're leaving , I guess I'm flying solo . Night sweets .	 
my tweets are not sugar coated , they may seem racial , sexist , ignorant and more . So if you are sensitive ple .	 
Training went well tonight Fiore ran a great wrestling and grappling class about to head over and eat then come back for MUAY THAI at 8:00	 
it 's hard to sleep during the day and I work at night . So by the time I'm sleepy its time for work	 
you keep tweeting today zzz	 
I wish People Stop Asking " Is there School tomorrow "	 
Wayne Gretzky was the answer to final Jeopardy tonight . Thanks for the hockey love , Jeopardy . 
My daddy comes home tonight 	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
morning  where did you yesterday ?	 
Come out tonight to see some amazing local art ! 
ima be drunk as shit tonight	 
go for it , i think my prof lied =_= have fun ! good night !	 
NO not better . and you made me wear your girly green scarf this morning ! did you burn it ?	 
lets party tomorrow !	 
I don't unless it 's getting towards night , or at night , and so that 's kind of when I want to put it back into use .	 
darkside of the sun- tokio hotel . 3	 
Scott Pilgrim Vs . The World SoundBoard will be available in the Android Market by Friday , 1/28/11 . At 12 Noon . Please be supportive and d/l	 
Last week ! Follow for your chance to attend Bowie 's fashion week show ! One lucky winner announced TODAY at 5PM !	 
Homemade blackberry muffins for tomorrow . Hope he makes his flight 
Hah well that sure wouldn't help him win a fake fight . I may or may not have been stopped at a stoplight when I did that	 
James May built a life sized LEGO house , it only makes sense that some one would make a micro scale version of it .  
Lol rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
youre bout to get stomped on sunday	 
Stop interference of MPs , bureaucrats in local govt Speakers at a seminar yesterday called for a s . 
I'm going to go to sleep now and I'm going to wake up utterly refreshed in the morning . yep .	 
welcome back ! Are you doing the ProBowl party tonight at Pearl ?	 
Okay . It 's now very likely that I'll be in Feb 15 and 16 .	 
Choose your words carefully . They may come back to destroy you .	 
I'm so seeing you on tomorrow 's E ! who wore it better ? ahah	 
what are you all up to tonight ? anyone know what 's up to ?	 
Mmmm . Work night out . Tomorrow won't be pleasant . But new pair of jeans ! 
Received my shipment from yesterday ! Great way to brighten my snowy NY week 
Everyone morning you go to starbucks to get coffee , I be at the bank like get this cash off me ! 
dats why we gotta go in tomorrow stretch that shit out	 
But yeah , as I said , good night ! 	 
I hate when ppl call over and over . Uh if I ain't answer the 1st two times then why you still callin ?	 
strips* I'm afraid my experience is limited , and I'm unable to Force-heal at the moment , but . if I may ?	 
Off to New York next Thursday	 
This is for sucking me yesterday 
Made Indonesian food last night for first time just had it came out amazing if you need pointers w/India shoot me a tweet	 
Every day do something that will inch you closer to a better tomorrow .	 
Just quietly I am disgusted with the reaction to the . Seeing today 's headlines made me so frustrated . This is Fox news politics .	 
Finished with the revisions for tonite . Now for Shrimp N Stuff .	 
Let 's wrap up Chevrolet II  Thursday with this SS , also from Eric B , another SS ! Hope you enjoyed Nova . 
is there still a lot of tickets left for your show on feb 4th so i can get them next week or something ?	 
Oh man rough day . still not over . music all day friday	 
How about I just strip for you ? Or just walk around naked all night ?	 
thanks ! I watch Ellen everyday , but I'll pay special attention Monday !	 
I like that . I hate Josh smith . But , I believe I heard Steve Nash say that this was his last season . So he may retire next season .	 
Great meeting you too ! Will definitely stop by on Sat before train .	 
Dunno if you saw the first tweet I deleted ? I thought the report had come from The Sun . Poor show from The Scotsman .	 
may god bless him lol 	 
Another Snow Day - So we had another snow day here in Boston , this is the the 3rd one , at this point they . 
Music on ! I wanna workout tomorrow !	 
I uploaded a YouTube video -- not feeling myself today 
dammit . it doesn't even matter cuz there 's only a car here on Tuesdays and if it was on a tues I wouldn't even be able to go	 
Coming home to tomorrow , and I'm bringing with me ! tomorrow night ! Who 's ready !?	 
its in the morning - robin thicke , i love how i think of when this song comes on 	 
I stay running , from tomorrow .	 
I know , I reported that on Sat 
And my night stands are full of open bibles	 
Today just keeps getting worse and worse . I give up .	 
lol , my friend fell in love AGAIN today 	 
No more suspense VP tells Jim Lehrer President asked him last year to be on 2012 ticket ; he accepted .	 
Future of the Virtual Village Summary , Jan 
I really want to the CW . I wanted new Supernatural tomorrow ! GAH !	 
I dont know the date of the tournament yet . there is a meeting about it next tuesday though	 
No complaints about this 22nd birthday . I've got some pretty amazing people in my life 	 
My charity water auctions end at midnight tonight 
today was a bunch of bullshit . ----- agreed	 
if tha head right I'll be there every night .	 
In a year you won't remember what I wore last night .	 
It better NOT be , didn't we have this talk earlier today	 
CW has postponed new Supernatural episode from tomorrow til 4th Feb . // Okay . So we wait . damn !	 
It 's 6:31 PM and I've tweeted four times today .	 
Just played out in my head how I want tomorrow afternoon to go like ;. please happen . :D	 
Chillin with today was dope . i think of him as family . although i fear he does not think the same . oh well . life sucks .	 
Great night 4711 with thanks guys 	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 221	 
Need to wash my hair tonight !	 
Earlier today it was a dude in the weightroom with only 1 shoe on 
Before , wat happens wen im gettin ready in the morning ; 
I have fever February 7th 9/8c on w/ the Fantastic - Too excited -*TCC*	 
c'mon.compared to private insurance companies ?	 
Takers was surprisingly entertaining . Best performance was Christian Bale . 2nd best ? Ben Affleck in The Town .	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Home Depot has replaced all of their shovels with gardening supplies . In Edmonton . In January . Bravo .	 
Happy Friday - What are you guys up to this weekend ?	 
lls . Damn can i say ok 1st ?	 
New Blog Post Must Be Nice - Member 's Only Call in Authentic Self Nourishment February 2011 Not a member ? CLICK HER . 
field hockey tonight . vermont tomorrow	 
morning .) thanks . yeah , i wanna fly to Philippines.it 's warm ther e.i envy yo u.X )	 
Good morning to you all ka . Have a nice day na ka .	 
so much it won't air outside the US 1st . Remember the Beacon video thing wasn't opened for International f .	 
I've got an evening full of fun activities planned Vinyasa class with MC Yogi followed by George Clinton at Yoshi's! 
what time will your twitcam be tomorrow ? 	 
Holy crap , I've drank nearly 1 1/2 litres of coca cola today O_o This can't be good ! 
I wanna go to the movies tonight . Me to	 
" They don't know . Trill Gladiators going to feed da homeless on Feb . 12 and Video shoot a .	 
who is coming to the FREE workshop for Nonprofits tonight for ? Social Media Engagement is the topic ! is the venue .	 
is coming to my house on Monday ^-^	 
I've come 2 realize that every moment counts . In a minute , heck in a 2nd , ur whole life can change-4 better or worse . Thats jus .	 
you going out tomorrow	 
Tonight I spotted a neighbour hiding in the bushes . I'm not kidding .	 
game tomorrow vs crete be there or be sqaure lol	 
Have you checked www.IamSuperGorge.com today ? check it now and hit up with feedback	 
its too late for Egyptian Government to shut down phone lines , internet and all communications , everyone already know what to do tomorrow $$	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Winter is back tomorrow , so don't worry lol	 
BE NICE KOLA ! Remember you said you was nice yesterday !	 
More money to battle gangs | Toronto GTA | News | Toronto Sun via 
who is coming to the FREE workshop for Nonprofits tonight for ? Social Media Engagement is the topic ! is the venue .	 
I just can't stand the rain in July , the fireworks were exploding , but now it 's getting cold .	 
I wrote an epic essay on Winnie-the-Pooh and Calvin Hobbes . It formed part of 3rd Year university thesis . I got a 1st for it .	 
Being able to manage my TiVo online is amazing ! My netflix cue is soo long I may have great nieces and nephews before it 's done .	 
i promise i'm not really as evil as i may appear to be in this clip . 
i get out of class at 8 . and tomorrow im free all day	 
Thanks to making that ringtone , it will be stuck in my head all night at work . Which is kinda awesome .	 
Best night out of all the holidays . Late night swimming , poker , screaming in my sleep  and all that jazz .	 
Fortune cookie status ! Got one today that said this , " you are capable , competent , creative , and careful . Prove it " Wtf ?! Ain't that a bitch	 
gonna get my stuff together for tomorrow , study for a half hour then relax for the rest of the night	 
Okay , I'll stay awake . I only have work early in the morning haha ! x	 
My 1st solo album " People Hear What They See " will be available on later this year . Are you as excited as I am ?	 
can u plz follow me ? o ! i love sushi ! their my . 3rd favorite food !	 
Yesterday I didn't get to watch over the Internet , but Saturday watch on TV . And you ? Is enjoying some candidate ?	 
Guess who 's back ? 	 
=) It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
Hey , guess what 's NOT cancelled , contrary to some rumors ? SKINS . See you Monday ! 
I love hearing the Buzz and Excitement there is for Life Massive tonight ! When we come Expectant , God Moves ! Plus it will be wild Tonight !	 
Important things are happening tomorrow .	 
Indeed ! Need to speak to you actually , Kev and family coming here next Sunday to see the munchkin . You fancy bringing yours ?	 
Bus strike is finally over ! And rides are free for the first two weeks of February !  . Sweet deal .	 
Yay almost the weekend , gonna have lunch at Amy 's friday , no theres a surprise !	 
He played this yr ? And a complete joke that Yao is a starter . Are you kidding me ? guy hasn't played since November 7th !	 
man he best be doing them on sunday if not he is getting a drop kick to the face	 
phone sex 2 night	 
I hope I can see you today .	 
Got food for my bday tomorrow  
Red Wigs on sale at tonight 's game raising money for Ronald McDonald House Charities ! $5 ! Get them at the game near the main foyer doors !	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Time is running out to vote in the ! Vote for Simply Hired in the category today ! 
Today Im in my mind , trying to write a song	 
An evening creating Wireframes with the excellent Balsamic Mockups	 
why suddenly monday cant ? Im sho lost once wake up eh hahahah	 
miss u 2 girl ! u doin anything tonight friend ? nope . I wanted 2 . but my hair ain done 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Yeah ! It 's Friday today !	 
Huh . I don't normally forget to buy bacon . Considering today 's grocery store fail , I'm going with brain tumor .	 
the empire of the sun . 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
wtf can I do . I want somewhere to spend tomorrow can't fade this house smh	 
I'm not rocking for school tomorrow .	 
Is today day 1 ? Cos you might have it back tomorrow with comm bank , I get my stuff on a Saturday , never on a Monday though	 
morning caprice :D have a lovely day today :D Gd morning World !	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries an Honor Society Silent Library episode , wow this night could not get any better . GAL+S24= story of my life	 
The greatest story ever told , as of today i love too	 
i had a kinda weird dream last night it was kinda like this . 
Morning too  Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking . Gonna shoot a new commercial for Tolak	 
Join us tomorrow for a live Q&A on fish with small pet expert John Gerstenberger , starting at 3pm EST right here on Twitter .	 
Been reading levy comments this morning . Selfishness yes , but also real fear from people who have much . Don't get it .	 
Schnuck 's U-City this Saturday 4pm-6pm wine tasting - come get freaky , have some food and meet some new people . JMed	 
Philly schools closed already for tomorrow ? What ?! Does this mean I don't have to go into the office either ? 
got you brotha , ima add it to the so summa post on feb 1st	 
The greatest story ever told , as of today i love too	 
STAMP no school tomorrow ! Endless moves	 
Today 's Groupon pay $10 for a $20 giftcard  . Time to stock up on foam soap ! 
They did just announce it 's going rain saturday night tho . LMAO	 
good morning men .	 
Groves pleads not guilty to ABC charges FAILED entrepreneur Eddy Groves has faced a Brisbane court this morning . 
Today 's cult classic froma silent movie -- Lulu  via 
Wow , if the Sun and the Daily Mail think you have done something Homophobic , you have definitely crossed a line .	 
Is it Friday yet ? // Feels like it . I've been a day off all week .	 
Some more tomorrow hopefully . ^____^	 
Thanks Kofi ! Please tune in for a new Parks and Rec tonight at 930 on NBC . It is very entertaining .	 
I wanna do somethin tonight , but I gotta be in mooresville at 8am smh	 
I am really glad that I didn't have School today . But it really went fast .  Selena Is Best	 
Get da facts 1st	 
damn near might jus be on some chill shit tonight tho	 
LAST WORD Tonight at 8pm ET , NYC Mayor Michael Bloomberg responds to his NRA critics in an exclusive interview .	 
Sticks and stones may break bones and the shells may hurt me but I take it like a man you BEG 4 MERCY .	 
nbd Monday tortillas at my house	 
you don't realize how far some places are until it 's night and you are drivin by yourself	 
I'm going to see the incredible at Living Arts Centre Feb 11 . Who wants to come with ? 
JetBlue expects fare , fee hikes to continue - I need to move to FL so I don't have to fly ! YUK 
" One good small action by you today , will change the world for good tomorrow . Thats the Butterfly Effect " ~R . Louis	 
" He Walks The Night ." The first one to get it was .	 
It 's a little like this today . -- ashlee simpson just let me cry + lyrics via 
tna was awesome tonight . so good I could go watch every single night . 
My def told my bf I hated him the other night when I was drunk . o_O Lol I always tell devin that wen I'm drunk lol	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 222	 
Did my essay that 's due Monday woo I didn't procrastinate !	 
Today was slum as shit all of this snow really slowed things down	 
GooD Morning ka smile All day ka	 
Have a stomachache on Friday morning -_-	 
Everyone sleeps on heated floors in Korea , unfortunately ours was broken last night and I was frying like an egg .	 
great day today -- so nice to get off to a great start for a change	 
Lmfao yes like today x )	 
then sunday lol tell ur ppl and ill tell mine haha	 
at everyone who has school tomorrow	 
no it 's a school night but I am tomorrow ! !	 
Posting a review of Tommyknocker 's Cocoa Porter Winter Warmer tomorrow before venturing to Ohio for some Great Lakes beer . Fun will ensue .	 
Who is in Seoul in March ? I would like to invite you to our classical  info 
I'm glad all of my followers had a great day today ! I'm really digging all of the positive Zen ! Lol	 
" I luv when u unleash ur loco !" Never been accused of lacking inner loco  . Ready for tonight ! Go Gauchos !	 
I can't wait for Feb 18 when my weekend of hockey starts ! First I'm going to the AHL Heat game , then I'm going to get tickets for the alumi	 
I was off . I work tomorrow though unluckily	 
well he wont give them to me . yeah and then Ciaran and Jack there talking cuz they had no work with them on Tuesday :/	 
promises release of Palin emails by May 31 
FP reports enjoying playing w/ a boy named Michael at school today . They played with puzzles .	 
Im so confused as to what is happening so I will just wait until tomorrow to find out . I refuse to listen to anyone but a teacher	 
March Promotion Kids are Free in , book your Family Vacation before Jan . 31 
If its a blowout , Im leaving myself . me too . to the 25th power ! lol	 
I want the Sims 3 night life ! /// i have a when i saw that tweet , lmao . i thought it said something else	 
Auburn 's updated national recruiting ranking for 2011 3rd on Scout , 6th on Rivals , 9th on ESPN	 
CDC releases new diabetes estimates for US By Eryn Brown Los Angeles Times A factsheet released Wednesday by th . 
Family booted from plane over infant carrier A California mother says she was forced off a United Airline . 
That must be the conf Matt Waxman was to be in town for . His lecture today was canceled because of east coast flight woes .	 
about to do some push up 's had a go ass nap no hw today chillin eazy	 
had 4 hours of choir practice , 2 1/2 more tonight . But at least we're on the way to Applebee's!	 
Its my birthday today i really want you to wish me a ! Pretty please 333	 
Sheesh ! Been all over the metroplex today . Wonder what ATX is gonna have in store for us tonight	 
And here is the write-up by the Guardian journalist after he survived the night 
Today 's a good day . Classes only in ! Don't have to keep checking timetable .	 
There 's no need for ageism . may be advanced in years but he has a full set of teeth . Granted they may not be his own .	 
Ahh today is and ' s birthdays not yet for them but HAPPY BiRTHDAY ! I love you guys . xx	 
i wanna go shopping on friday night	 
Man is on a roll tossing out all these tweets . I bet he tosses guys out of the ring just as well on Sunday !	 
I really wanted to tackle one of the girls tonight . I swear if this was football she'd be down all the time .	 
has a massive headache but still got her PB work done for today . Can I has treat now ?	 
housework seems to be the thing today . Ugh . How bout you ?	 
I recommend every chick go buy them a I used mine 3 times today ! I'm going 2 need more batteries ! Lmao . smh lol	 
18 will be out saturday 	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship . falsoo	 
no u dumbass its the 27th	 
New Task Posted Dish washing tomorrow 	 
You know what 's good at this time of night when you have a cold ., sleep . Night night . x	 
Today is a day of reunions Ashley M . stopped by for a visit , now going to dinner with a childhood friend . haven't seen him in 15 years !	 
Jessup left KKR today . On a good note but I sure am gonna miss that guy .	 
good night . :D	 
On a Friday night in March . Wish I had someone to go with ! I wanna get 2 , but it 's likely I'll go alone . 	 
Practical magic is on( jersey shore later , with jessica maybe taylor tomorrow( :	 
1st thing to do to celebrate 's bday today Requested Backstreet Boys song on radio n they played it . Thx 
till the sun comes up ?	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
i feel like everybodys texted me at some point today . its been a crazy day for talking . but i want some real company ! 
My brother and his boys are heading to seoul today . All of em must be dreaming of getting a kpop wife . Excited gila .	 
Today couldn't have gone any better ( Hung out with Jarret , Phone 's back on , And I got the perfect guy ( xD	 
Chargers once again overcome 10-point second-half deficit to win the game . 5th time this season they've done that .	 
thats where me and batista ate today 
nice cool day today , finally .	 
For the evening crowd , a very good cause and shameless self-interest 
Let 's just . No SPN tomorrow night /3	 
Lets go to the mall today !	 
where were u today man ?	 
It 's also a Saturday and the Phils are at home . So I don't see why not .	 
After Monday and Tuesday even the Calender says , riday .	 
this town is like a 3rd world country	 
No way to control pollen . A 7th grade biology student knows that . Gonna have to find a way to grow all my own .	 
Tonight tune into ma show 8pm-10pm www.jahyummy.com goin in crazy tonight jus watch how crazy this be all new trenton/jersey radio !	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
Entries open for ' BtoB 's ' Social Media Marketing Awards Marketers and agencies may submit entries for the best . .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Wall Street worries Revel may not have enough cash flow to repay $ 1.15 billion .ATLANTIC CITY - Wall Street . 
Is Apple 's iPad invincible ?Despite an army of challengers drawing back their bows , Apple 's iPad may ride out t . 
Yall going out tonight ?	 
this is what driving home in my smart car felt like last night 
No work for me tomorrow ! ^__^	 
baby , baby blue eyes , stay with me by my side , through the morning till the night	 
wish me luck on feb . 5 i am gonna play a solo on my trumpet for ISSMA solo and ensemble festival i am already nervous 	 
Western Union would be down today . WTF	 
chem lab in 30 minutes then 300 w/part of my history class at 10 , busy night	 
i'm thinking snowman  building on saturday -- what do you say , no libs neighbors ? cc 
saturday date means sweatpants	 
If it 's 6:30 PM in St . Louis , it'll be 8:30 AM the next morning in Shanghai . This could end badly . 	 
son of a Bi**h Sunday lmao God forgive me 
I can't say how overjoyed I am to go to Matt Newman 's class at Prana Yoga tonight ! 
i will shit 10 bricks if there is school tomorrow	 
good morning . How was the movie ?	 
It 's at The Common sometime next month , February 22nd maybe .	 
Really unmotivated to go to the gym today but sometimes those days turn into the best workouts	 
i put some more stuff in the hallway~ some of the stuff from last night was already taken :D 
Sorry that I haven't logged on today  I'm posting quotes now !	 
Sick ! Absent today   
so my job had they inventory today . I kno that shit gonna hurt . cuz I run a small business within . 
Join our mailing list today ! Help us stay in touch with you . 
chat tonight . Can't wait !	 
Im down thanks . lets drink beers in benicia tonight	 
off to bed nighty night xx	 
i love the Back to December video ! i love your bangs !	 
psychol exam today . just another D to the list 	 
I wanna go out to eat tomorrow or Sat Me too ! Red Lobster ?	 
Photo Me holding my head made of cake at the Blu Dot shoot today . 
Yes . 3 :D But,that 's only part of the reason why i want it to be Sunday . 3 :D	 
is hoping a lot of people go tomorrow night	 
What a week it has been ! Looking forward to the weekend to soak up this summer/winter sun !	 
Fantastic . Even though we bought a car . RT@cecilhaire Metrobus strike is over . Buses on the road Monday . 
I know right . But I don't wanna go back tomorrow . Did you look at the bio lab yet ?	 
So . I'm on a social media panel tomorrow . Hope I can use my words !	 
omg tonight is Jersey Shore ! almost forgot !	 
i wake up early in the morning to a fat blunt and my phone full of missed calls	 
damn it to hell i think i may have a cavity	 
Please help find a communication device desperately needed by a disabled man - last seen 200 blk E . King Ed Jan 23 h .	 
C'mon Big Time Rushers Carlos fans , is only 1 away from 500 followers ! Follow them tell me , and I'll give you a shoutout	 
I'm planning on taking a nap , myself . around midnight or so . 
Please tell us your on George Lopez ' show tonight or sometime soon . :D	 
" Nothing tastes better than a beer on a weekday afternoon , when 99.8 % of people are at jobs they hate ." - Casey ( wat .	 
Today is the day . Give it all that you've got . Chase like nobody 's business	 
Diego 's Mexican Food and Cantina is up and running on the 16th Street Mall Diego 's Mexican Food and Cantina . 
Today is my official I don't know and don't care that I don't know day . 
Don't kno what babies  I'm wearing tonight ?!?	 
I'm starving . where is ? He must know we're going to have the " dryer talk " tonight . LOL	 
US officials expect ' significant violence ' in Egypt tomorrow	 
gettin ready for , on flight now , associate coming out on Friday after setup 
Michael Thompson shot great today at Torrey Pines . 
i had a whole bunch of those last night ! beer	 
Strip club tomorrow with my nigga Joe . Cant wait .	 
I brought something special in my luggage for tomorrow as well . hope there 's wifi where I'm going .	 
I emailed to ask about it they said it had been shipped out on the 13th . I . am not impressed I haven't received it yet .	 
So , I guess it 's time to start homework . Probably no school tomorrow 	 
Good fucking night everyone !	 
how are u bro ! new tracks work in progress ?) see u tomorrow !	 
That workout from last night got me sore as hell tho .	 
i think imma just call it a night now .	 
Night twitter nd friends before the GF throws my phone out the window . More tomorrow .	 
what do we tweet tomorrow ?	 
" Check out ya boys from at my shoot today ! Pooch I love him , lol	 
to throw the diet out the window tonight or not . hmmm this is tough ! no homo	 
I went to work today ! In your face , Snow !  
Union landing on saturday ?	 
Yao Ming being voted to the All-Star game is just another reason why the NBA is my* 3rd favorite sport .	 
I've always been and always will be an fan . Almost 10 years since I heard my first TEN song , and I definitely reconnected today .	 
I just got an automated call from my kids school , they are closing again tomorrow . They will be going to school until August at this rate .	 
Morning friends in Singapore . TGIF and CNY is just around the corner .	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Reason behind Steve Jobs ' medical leave unclear via 
Do females ever go the club thinking tonight I just want to get f*ck*d	 
Might aswell come off this shit , TOO much beef on twitter tonight , Night	 
D-E-L-I-S-H ! For first time I used tofu that I pressed and froze weeks ago . Thawed yesterday . Totally absorbed marinade .	 
an afternoon in a hotel room with few distractions and good wifi really helps when you've got a bunch of meat-mad bloggers . 
This lady said good night . I'm like nigga we aint goin to sleep . 
do u know if i can git da Pink Friday on ma ipod nano ?	 
2535 5% of Justin 's fans think he was born on March 14th , if you know when his birthday is ( ;	 
Listening to the show tonight ? You'll find the chat on the toolbar at the bottom of each page . Show in 30 mins ! 
I thought u had stuff to do saturday	 
God 's love is new EVERY morning .	 
but will finish it tomorrow or Sat .	 
I crushed a box of Kellogg 's cornflakes this morning , does that make me a cereal killer ? 
hmmm . twice now that my xbox has froze after a game on firing range tonight .	 
And on a happier note , I returned my earbuds today :o Finally . Now I can go buy new ones , yay .	 
I just remembered jersey shore is on tonight ! Yippee !	 
israel today | Hizballah 's man takes over in Lebanon - israel today 
last day of school and tomorrow starts holiday for 9 days~~	 
today i was basically a hermit . barely left my room . 1st interaction w/ the fam pissed me off . ready to move . sadly funds aren't ready yet .	 
Great practice tonight . Managed to get full marks on everything aside from my derby stance and left T-stops . Veh proud of the whole team \o/	 
Apple TV tonight , and I was crying when I saw this 
Same here dear Dina ! Rt Head spinning . will dream of masses tonight . 
Booked in tomorrow night at Pearson 's Arms as a treat for passing my exam . Hoping I won't regret it after people 's recent reviews !	 
Y dudes b da 1st 2 hit up anotha chic soon him n his grl break up ? But b talkin all dat " baby u da only 1 4 me " shit . Frauds !	 
stretches are key , I decided against them tonight and now paying the price	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
When the concert is over , you should not play any superfluous notes you may have left . If you have any , please play them on .	 
oh we will find out tomorrow lol	 
packing a survival kit for the aiport jammies , snacks , pillow , and toiletry kit . hoping if im over-prepared i wont have to spend the night !	 
work is okay . the kids are so sweet  I love singing with them and doing art ! I decorated the classroom today !	 
of course it will , I'll be in your tomorrow my darling ! x	 
Schools closed on Friday , January 28 due to weather and power loss ; administrative offices open .	 
Was Ani on today ? How was it ? Highlights ?	 
today i taught my lil sis to swim and i told her to say NEVER SAY NEVER ! when it gets hard , and she shouted all over the pool !	 
Death in custody begins | Society | guardian.co.uk 
So you the preacher for the night ?!?!? Lmao@simplyapearl never let anyone hold ur past over ur head the last is the past !	 
I don't wanna go to school tomorrow .	 
I added 5 new colors of my popular bubble necklace to my etsy shop today . Pick your favorite one here . 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Thanks for all the love for my book today , bloggers ! Much appreciated ! Stay tuned for my blog tour visit tomorrow w/ Ja .	 
Also , Bale is negotiating an improved contract right now . May be coincidence , but story comes in handy , no ?	 
I love feel good friday !	 
Sad but so very true ! " Bud Adams is one crazy . He may eventually give Al Davis a run for his money ."	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Oh yeah I know lol . Updated PHP and it broke it . Only happened yesterday . Probably gonna fix it tonight .	 
Today , I got three pieces of mail saying that all my student loans are being transferred to Sallie Mae . Yay . 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 224	 
Finally Tuesday/Finalmente el martes 
MAIL The Friday Five Sexy football ? Not with these Dutch flops Despite coming through Ajax 's highly-regarded youth . 
yeah man ! are you ready for sunday ?	 
I knew was gonna be mayor 1st time i seen him on TV . people think they have an actual choice . lol .	 
I knew was gonna be mayor 1st time i seen him on TV . people think they have an actual choice . lol .	 
and now i`m just starving . any idea what would to be good for breakfast in this morning ? 
that parade are at dalle a salle and melissas school on 8th feb ! shall we stalk ?; ) xx	 
we lost a little homey yesterday . our little cat kurt . everyone is bummed , but glad we all got to know him . rest easy little buddy .	 
May god bless everyone 
Expedia CruiseShipCenters-King Of The Brands In today 's competitive world , it 's often very hard for a small tra . 
Papa Johns pizza for dinner , yum . Real Housewives of 90210 reunion tonight then outsourced on NBC can't wait =)	 
Jeff Fisher 3rd among active coaches in wins . 20th all time ! Be careful what you Fisher Haters ask for !	 
snow day again tomorrow !	 
Join us next Fri . Feb 4th The Velvet Lily for an evening of cocktails , lingerie , pin-up glamour ! 
Sending out good vibes/luck and thanks . Nelson Mandela stays in hospital for a second night , amid growing concerns .	 
ima be mad tomorrow watch smh -_- , was you mad when that happened to you ?	 
i gtg ppl ! have fun with your lives ! have a nice friday tomorrow !	 
I promise it won't be over until tomorrow morning . Lol	 
School or not tomorrow I'm chilling , it 's not like I do shit there anyway .	 
i've tweeted sparingly today .	 
Happy friday  happy friday everyone !	 
LOL im at sheridan only wed but at the trafalgar campus in oakville cus my program is joint btwn york/sheridan ! apply there 	 
Omg let 's front run mutual fund merger Monday	 
Being social tonight with some kapsigs	 
yes that 's what I mean , our songs , that only dolphins can understand . Thanks for today by the way . You rocked .	 
extended ! to win $ 100.00 USD ! Final name and winner picked Saturday !  .	 
Do you know if you will still be airing the episode ' Collateral ' on Sunday night ?	 
he walks the night 	 
How many people have ever just sat down and read the dictionary ?	 
r u goin to skool tomorrow	 
" Im never drinking again ". blatantly getting drunk on Saturday	 
no school tomorrow !	 
Glad we put One Call Now in place . Came in handy to notify people the office was closed today .	 
So needs 253 more followers . If you love good music you should follow The BCC today . Much Love Mariah H	 
 yay I think I may be doing my cover of zoom into me video in possibly the next two weeks or so ^ . ^ 
Thanks , Liz ! Looking forward to seeing you tomorrow ! 
No clue . I won't be watching the rerun tonight though .	 
LMAO that was on mine today haha	 
Foundation for a Better Tomorrow . Do they only run commercials in January , but on every channel , all the time ?	 
playing with Reid MAgette tonight at the End with and and Salamanders ! hit it !	 
I missed today . I hope she feels better tomorrow 	 
It 's a discussion that 's been done to death but all the EDL were ever gonna do was cause more tension . Tonight 's incident case in point .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur 	 
Tonight I'm writing away . I guess you could say this is my Sputnik moment .	 
I think my dream may come true before the summer	 
Photo Last night I found myself on the west side of Manhattan trying to see a friend in town who was on the . 
i dont see a test in march an no ! its too soon	 
Study for geometry test tomorrow .	 
Today I got a lot done and apparently have another husband contestant ! hahaha	 
enjoyed hanging out with today ! // take a second today and lift up Cedar Ridge church in Cedartown and pa .	 
Find out how to make your life not boring ! Attend a talk by me in DC on 29 Jan ! 
Sitting at bar for dinner is a bit like roulette you can be on your own . or like tonight end up next to Milton from Office Space . Oi vey .	 
Flight plan Next up is the Cyprus Cup in March . More top quality games as part of their preparation for the Wor . 
i missed you two today ! i'll see you both tomorrow 	 
hell yeah ! I love that we trended like a million hashtags about Gaga today , and other 6 on the last 6 days	 
Sufjan Stevens at the Sydney Opera House last night was incredible , as was Owen Pallet who opened . A true talent who should be massive !	 
Good morning all ! What have you got planned for the weekend ?	 
I'm getting it well lubricated tonight . Out for dinner and drinks w/friend . But I'm around corner from apt .	 
Don't let no one put labels on you great word last night ( pastor Robert Chavez	 
may they crush heads ! 	 
Cool . Are you guys gonna hang out tonight ?	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Damn I'm having the best night !	 
Happy Friday to you as well 	 
I just watched the interview of the old spice guy from february . ahem . ice please .	 
But is it 68 and sunny ?! Did you swim today ? =)	 
Going to hoop with Limas so and can enjoy some of their anniversary night .	 
Was up til 2 am finishing a project , stress gone , took a nice nap today , I feel human again	 
pagi kak  Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive thinking . Gonna shoot a new . 
Today in Lagos , 2002 Massive armory explosion killed 1000+ 
lol yep , sorry i have night class on Wednesday so i wasn't back home till 9 pm	 
Today was like my test and now I really have my answers ! so im gonna need a few people to move it along	 
Joe is going to be on entertainment tonight .	 
maybe I shouldn't have worn flip flops today . |	 
What happen to the drake that sampled OG weed music and classic lines to November 18th*	 
yeah I'm pretty sure a 13th player gets added due to injuries . That 's why Chris Kaman and David Lee made it last year	 
i had a snow days yesterday and today , i just want one tomorrow too	 
Diet starts Monday .  
Tuition fees are too high . Get involved . Take action before Feb 4th . Demand they listen ! 
Everyone come get funky at venia tomorrow ! i better see the twist ! and bring ur rollerskates !	 
Tomorrow for we've got a box of gorgeous fair trade chocolates to win - just follow and watch for spec .	 
will u be attending the grand alumni home coming tonight .	 
Now Qwest is sending a tech tomorrow to check outside lines but if they come inside they'll charge $80 . Nice ! 
I think I'm starting tonight !	 
Lol make that money ! rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Man I'm really having a hard time adjusting to not watching the evening cable news shows anymore since Olbermann left 
Save them for your annual meeting next week.Can't believe it 's 27th annual . Wow .	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
Awesome talk today sexy lady ! Looking forward to our retreat in March ! xo	 
Get Your FREE website Evaluation , if you would like to be on 1st Page Of Google ! 
Never put off till tomorrow what may be done today .	 
i will be on just not as much LOL monday though i gotta get butt in gear edit and tweet hee hee	 
So today wraps it up . 2 weeks of not eating out.I'm proud of myself . Now I can finally get chipotle tonight 
Karaoke in the morning	 
my five minutes of fame has passed . Still , 5th most read article on HBR is nothing to sneeze at .	 
Omg c'mon tv ! I wanna watch how i met your mother	 
just left practice real good work today im ready for holy rosary .	 
haha . I did last night , boom .	 
oh my goodness ! Did u catch American idol last night ?	 
It 's to late in the evening for me to come up with such in depth answers to these questions ! block lolol .	 
Fun Friday Discount Day via 
good morning my husbands haha 
hope u r ok today and wish u great day .	 
me is very tired now so going to listen to the lords song then sleep . praise the lord for the night nurse	 
please in concert Feb 11-12 For more info thank you	 
seen all these nice valentine gifts today , if I had a valentines I would treat him right .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive k	 
The future you have , tomorrow , won't be the same future you had , yesterday .'	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 225	 
Im really happy to be spending the night out .	 
explore your fantasies Tonight in Kentucky 
Performing in BK Sat Feb 5th - be part of this 
I'm going to wear my to my math exam tomorrow , and write my exam in 3D . Wouldn't that be cool ?	 
I never did get around to shoveling while the sun was up . Oh well	 
My brother 's school has off tomorrow . All Catholic boys ' schools are fulla a buncha wimps	 
good morning from breezy pattaya . ^) meeting whole day today ! hurr .	 
It 's getting late.I'll watch more Real School tomorrow . hopefully Eli will FINALLY BE IN IT !	 
ooh I should have come to hot yoga today !	 
I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . 
. In Mexico and it 's looking unlikely that I'll see a coffee today xx	 
i sent you a cny card last tuesday	 
I think I may have been singing a bit hard today . My voice is course from all the recording , lol ! Oh well laying down the tracks people !	 
Yesterday Madame clean the tracks , . what the hell did she do !	 
He was at the Village Idiot with a few girls Sat afternoon sipping beer but didnt seem roman .	 
just cancel school tomorrow i don't see any point going to school on a Friday	 
We are gonna meet Martha today ! :D	 
Having a blast with Miss at our shoot today ! They are as amazing as they are tall !	 
Due to the inclement weather , all School District of Philadelphia Schools will be closed Friday , January 28th .	 
Signing off now , but first must thank people for mentions . Have a great evening .	 
congratulations to mr Costain on winning a national academy recruitment bafta film agency award tonight at the national g awards	 
Cute ass lmao Can I hitt it in the morning 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
Oh . monkeys to get off my back.can't wait to spin tonight at . 
This was me today because I was hungry ALL DAY .	 
I know , I have had some evil customers today , I need something to make me laugh instead of swearing . haha	 
Performing in BK Sat Feb 5th - be part of this 
Today is the BOO 's birthday !	 
That 's gay as ah bitch that we got school tomorrow	 
and playing video games in the middle of the night and I'll stay up late and I wont even care	 
about to do some homework then study for my test tomorrow .	 
Sweet ! Just read that the Mariners and Marlins series is being moved to Seattle with NL rules at AL Park . I may have to go to a game	 
freakin work . I won't be at rehearsals on Thursday	 
zif i entered the ville of stank and aids yesterday 
y does that serial killer sunday ad remind me of them co-op ads ?	 
i think im going to dream about this tonight .	 
Today Anniversary of Liberation of Auschwitz ~ Largest Nazi Death Camp . It 's real and it really did happen . All of it~ The Holocaust . Period	 
i probably am . lol . why are you calling this your 1st solo though , what was 101 and 102 ?	 
friday , please be my day 
i hate these dang blasted bathrooms in the library 6th floor !	 
No , she didn't. I'm sure she will tomorrow . I got Italy .	 
February is Heart Month , so check out this latest blog on , and your heart 's health . 
I think this weekend should be our Girls Night Out and then next weekend it can be a group event =) . sounds like a plan	 
Definitely not a part of the waste of time Twitter stuff you mentioned yesterday	 
today in my studio ? Whatcha mean ?	 
Natural Light Skol , sir , you're going to have a pounding headache tomorrow .	 
I only show no-class on Thursday nights because I attend no-class on Fridays	 
Are there any plans for a Corre t-shirt ? . watch smackdown tomorrow night	 
Give Goose Island Night Stalker a try . Great Imperial Stout !	 
been listening to CFTPA all day today at work . please play Los Angeles again .	 
Now starting on 28 Feb , places still available come work with me . 	 
it 's mine and b-day today would really love it if you could make our day with a b-day .	 
Heading to Denver tonight for a few days of ! Anyone looking for talent ?	 
Word count today is at 2,347 . I think I might be able to squeeze out another 900 or so , but first , I need tea .	 
Did screencaps of yesterday 's shows from 
it will count this Sunday	 
sorry bout the delay in streaming , been doing a couple of other things . one of them should be up today~ get excited	 
I'm glad all of my followers had a great day today ! I'm really digging all of the positive Zen ! Lol	 
I was looking for u today to give u ur headphones back . U left early yesterday	 
Walking to work today . Close to crying .	 
Playing a show tonight at the Bovine Sex Club  with Divine Hammer .	 
lol no I just have no classes on Friday 's	 
mon-thurs my friend ) but Friday she always dump me !	 
I'm too happy tomorrow is Friday	 
well call me tomorrow and well sort it out . you gotta come early . like 10am early	 
Glad to see you're as mature as a 6th grader " yeah I meant to say douce , u douche . eat a cock , I know u do "	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Me you bruce and dub date haha that movie looks AMAZING . Going tonight cannot wait !	 
I love how everyone 's reaction to me telling them that I was gonna sign an Mj song in class for ASL today was " Oh that figures " lmao	 
my phone is still off til tomorrow	 
, make sure you tell us how you like the show tonight !	 
Have tweeted yet today ? 
hey I'll teach you how to ride a horse tonight .	 
you . At least just for tonight ."	 
Be there tomorrow ! 
still studying ugh . i gotta miss the new JS episode so i can get some sleep tonite smh ! Thank goodness for DVR 	 
We must never forget the lessons of Cronulla . Seeing Love and Hate tonight ! 
I was just kidding marta , thanks  3 next monday I promise to know till 15  ok 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
can't wait to get to vermont tomorrow and leave this snow . . oh wait .	 
imma get more blank DVDs over the weekend and I'll burn it then and give it to you Monday . Kay ?	 
The 1st and 2nd limit Gov power what does the income tax ammendment do ? Yep , progressives have been around for a LON .	 
Haven't had Noodles iin a long time I guess that 's what Im having tonight	 
Tomarrow is Friday . Ima walk up inside Tru night club in Broad Ripple and . 
Y am I sad cause my plan is falling apart . He leave tomorrow and don't look like I will c him	 
I guess it was Wed not Sat , our source gave us bad info . Thanks for the tip ! .	 
Nobody wanna see you win in the end your biggest enemy may be your friend .	 
Today might just be the most productive day I've ever had .	 
I will be pissed if we have off tomorrow . Not trying to make up days in June . Community Day ftw	 
Art Institute of Chicago is FREE every weekday until Feb 4 ! 
LOL , may i suggest some singing practice to w/ ?  	 
I will hit up for lunch tomorrow . What to get , hmmm .	 
For our 1st winner . won the VIP coupons in a tote bag ! 
I may be bipolar	 
im gonna knock myself out til monday haha cant take anymore of waiting lmao lost my patience now	 
Fast Food Gives Way to Gourmet at 6th and Grand via 
why can't be on every night ?	 
7 months 2 weeks , my birthday is in September . Not counting January as it 's nearly over .	 
3 runners at Moonee Valley tonight Master Harry , There 's Only One Typhoon Tracy good luck to all connections	 
LAST WORD Tonight at 8pm ET , NYC Mayor Michael Bloomberg responds to his NRA critics in an exclusive interview .	 
' Stop Hey ' is OK when vs .  Rusko or Everything Everything , making Sunday Girl at best an average featuring vocalist .	 
What 's ur fave wine to drink on a hot day ? Head to the for this Sun - it'll be a few deg cooler up here :D	 
Morning too Nez .  Have a nice day Morning Tweez .  Starting the day with prayer and positive  
And so , I received an award yesterday  Keller Williams ' ROOKIE OF THE YEAR 201  all by the grace of God 	 
Taking the evening off . enjoy everybody	 
Step your game up connor It 's 6:31 PM and I've tweeted four times today .	 
My birthday 's tomorrow ! :O	 
At the Dior event tonight Dillard's. Way to work tht red carpet , sexy !  
to -859 people who tweeted me today .	 
get on my badd side today	 
ready for the reunion tonite !?!?!?!?	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
bring them to stc tomorrow !	 
My " Arid Harvests " proof arrived in the mail today . Looks pretty good so far .	 
we go tucker saturday !	 
Let 's Get Plowed [ Pic Of The Day ] - [ The streets in Brooklyn were clear today for these women to walk their dogs in . 
Catacombs The Onion will be here tonight and you know what that means , FREE BEER ! Free Hazed and Infused from . 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
yes ! and then jersey shore tonight too =) this is a great night !	 
Its meeting time for our preschool educational ministry~say a prayer please , Im stepping out in faith tonight#fb	 
On the news today- Tony Abbott bagging the flood levy and a volcano blocking flights to Bali . Two big ash holes .	 
allat ) ' night of the party shit gon be on didida	 
Sometimes u have to see them as ur crayon , they may not be ur favorite color , but u need them to complete the picture	 
heat game tonight good luck 
is forcing me to listen to Paul Simmon all afternoon . I can kick her for that , right ?	 
L I probably should go to sleep , or I'll get no work done tomorrow L	 
I could make u a celebrity over night .	 
will be singing and playing tonight at The Other Side in Silverlake CA .	 
enjoying ' s excitement today  its always great to see good things happen to good people 	 
you may well laugh , my skull is the only head it is smeared on 
I'm still up for tomorrow if you'll be lunching anyway !	 
Cheap champagne and cheez-its First night in our new place is like a bad gallery opening .	 
Is there some sort of after party tonight ? I think you should go out and celebrate your first show in Toronto !	 
Aah foi tao lindo o tocando Remembering sunday no show 
Good weather , awesome 80km/h ride and looking forward to the start and end of work . Good Morning Kids !	 
its really not , I have been mad since this morning , so mad I skipped my first class	 
Happy Thursday ! Just sent you an email 	 
ok . I got ur card , I'll call u Sunday .	 
My timeline is f'in hilarious right now ! Twitter is nothing but jokes today . Everybody going in left and right . please follow 
' Yesterday I fell in love , today feels like my funeral .' 	 
down to drink a few tonight ?	 
you have to watch miss march this week end with me	 
Baltimore released its QB coach Jim Zorn today . Not a fit for either side . Zorn is expected to draw interest from othe .	 
it 's for Feb . so no Public Gardens . which is so sad !	 
i THINK THAT i MAY bE losing MY mIND ! " Take me out to the ball game ." what 's with the random lyrics tonight ?	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 226	 
do i really wanna go partying tonight ?	 
I don't see why they mix the 6th and 8th grade pe classe s.I don't like to see 11 year olds changing , I feel like a pedo	 
Ughh can't wait for this Saturday 33 vs Rendezvous w/ DJ Caffeine ! 
The Illinois Supreme Court ruled Thursday that former White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel met residency requirements 
My lovely friend ! Yes , Buenos Aires . I will be here till March and after I am going straight to Europe . Where on Earth are you ?	 
Brook isn't here . Dunno if she'll be here tonight . I am doing dinner here since C is cooking	 
January is Nat'l Mentoring month - what is YOUR impact ? .	 
Getting ready to leave for our mixer at the Brigantine Restaurant here in Poway . Hope to see many of you there . It 's from 5:30 - 7:30 tonight .	 
lol thinking I'm gonna let it slide for tonight and call her on it in the morning 
Thank U to those who took advantage of our 3-hour sale today . If you weren't here , you missed out on BIG savings on nice merchandise !	 
Tomorrow morning . Hopefull the weather will be okay .	 
Good Morning ! I'm planning to celebrate Chinese New Yr next week 
Tonight on entertainment tonight there will be new footage of the kardashian 's bar fight ! Tune in !	 
Chris Webber showing more passion fire tonight than at any time in his playing career	 
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  
my birthday is Feb . 2 . My mother spent her lovely Groundhogs Day delivering a baby . lol	 
Will the UK premier ' Moment 4 life ' video tonight like America ?	 
If ya head right i'll be there every night , i just might change your life	 
Listening to tonight realized how blessed we are to be this connected globally thru the power of . 
What kind of video should we do for 4th Anniversary - 3rd was pretty good , right ?	 
As for tonight 's winners ! You still have time ! It doesn't matter which day you pre-ordered the record ! Hit me w/ a twitpic receipt to enter !	 
yes I'm home .  the conference was yesterday . How are you ?	 
Upcoming Shows Announcement February 5th at Generations in Wheeling , WV February 26 at Wheeling Jesuit  
Great Pyramid May Hold Two Hidden Chambers Discovery News 
Lmao I would but the snow kept me in the house all day its Thursday 
mine did up until today lol	 
Want to be tomorrow 's winner and receive free lunch for 2 at Hash House at The M Resort ? Just click on our " win . 
SMG buyout issues clarified STOCKTON - Wednesday marked Day One of the 30-day transition from International . 
Your with starts Saturday in Chattanooga at the new but first come hang w us tomorrow in Lynchburg Va w/ 
Plenty of red in attendance tonight The entire Lady Topper squad , Ross Bjork AND Gary Ransdell .	 
Tonight tonight tonight tonight . I wanna be with you Tonight . tonight tonight tonight . I wanna be with you tonight . 	 
 How have you been ? Missed you like crazy !	 
Lively discussion at the Center for Family Success presentation on cyber-bullying last night . Thanks to our guest speakers , Miro and Cindy !	 
Getting a few things ready for tomorrow 's dinner party turned into super cleaning , phew ! Time to blog !	 
Sounds like tomorrow will be awful in . Authorities beefing up , Internet and mobile networks down . War against the .	 
In bed feeling guilty at my failed attempt at a late night working tonight .	 
Wanna see tricks splits ? Be at Paradise tonight !	 
Sounds like someone is sizing you up to . well . you may become a statue Fish , if that makes sense .	 
It 's raining cats and dogs ! Pets 4 months+ have 50% off their adoption fee thru 1/30 ! Find your new best friend today . htt .	 
is drinking red wine tonight . soon as get home I'm having a glass as well	 
not tonight but I'm in Houston still anyway	 
lol nah Friday n sat only had a bad experience	 
Entertainment Tonight is talking about the Betty White movie filmed at 
Blog post Wordless Wednesday When Pippi Takes Over the Camera 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Its a wonderful night for tv 	 
i'm ready to shop head out tonight .	 
any chance ya can hint Wen this album may be released . Very curious  x	 
One Night Counts for WA are at 
why " we walk the night "?	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Great workout . Plus my J 's came in the mail . Excited and I feel great . Time to hit the shower and knock some homework out . Girls night 8	 
lol u may want to ask 
Well since I wont be locking yoy down . I say you goin big tonite , 30 and 10 
You just have to keep on breathing because tomorrow the sun will rise , and who knows what the tide will bring .	 
Everyone wanting PGCPS to cancel school , watch them get pissed and give us a school day tomorrow .	 
oh yikes I didn't look at the prices - just saw the first tweet earlier today . 
A student caught me singing a Beyonce song today . They asked another student , " Is Mr . S singing BEYONCE ?!" Quickly I retorted , " Of course !"	 
Tonight 50 people showed up at meeting . How awesome is that ?	 
whole conference on the 10th !	 
Sounds like tomorrow will be awful in . Authorities beefing up , Internet and mobile networks down . War against the .	 
white people " who was the 1st person to decide it was cool to drink breast milk from a cow "	 
" Wether life 's disabilities left you outcast , bullied , or teased . Rejoice and love yourself today ' cause baby you were born this way "	 
Work , Gym , Bath , now relaxing with a lovely Gin Tonic . Happy days . But today is not an ordinary day it is ' Holocaust Memorial Day . Remember them	 
09:45 am - VIP and Priority Pass tickets may be picked up  
I ate a huge burrito today !)	 
alexa you are filipino , and tonight that is where you'll go . You are my friend . Hello , friend .	 
thanks . Having list of fun . Hope to see you sometime today 
that sucks :/ I had school today so I don't have any , hah .	 
I own the 3rd one if you wanna borrow !	 
its my dad ! he 's entertaining clients . he rang me to say that he was sat next to them ! you made our night Thank You Boyd !	 
. hey did i mention . tomorrow is my last exam ! soo excited ! :D	 
I love 7th heaven ! Hahahaha . Why 's happy 's fur so thick ? Because it 's full of SECRETS !	 
Why is everyone busy tomorrow . 
Purp Patron sound like a black mans to-do list when he skip church on Sunday .	 
are you doing a meet and greet February 19th at the Gibson amphitheater ?	 
The shock jocks on morning television are so anti it 's very tiresome to watch .	 
anyone in luton aware of major police activity in town tonight ? shooting ? helicopters ? radical . htt .	 
Experiment with Fish Today ! 
2nd major test for the hell week !  STAT ! wish me luck :D	 
aww mann ! . AYE . Ask yo ma what she gone do about Jeremiah cake ! . I need it Tuesday ! .	 
Smile Through It All releasing on iTunes tomorrow ! 	 
NOW it 's Supernatural who will take the hit in ratings . Seeing as it'll probably be online by Wednesday . This is so unfair .	 
haha cheers dude , I was so happy to give it a clean today  hehe I will definitely make the effort to clean it more often 	 
Come to " Snowboard Club Teams Meeting !" Friday , February 4 from 7:00 pm to 10:00 pm . Want to get involved in the . 
10 in mens how bout the 3 bears or 25th anniversary air max 97 's	 
Are you planning to meet during ? Book a room today before we fill up ! 
The story Boy , 5 , found unharmed in after Henderson abduction 	 
Egypt shuts down Internet on eve of Friday protest 
what is up with that date ?! Y do u keep saying feb 12 ?!? Lol	 
" Don't tell my boyfriend about tonight . He doesn't like me hanging out with lesbians "	 
They're going to talk about AJ on Entertainment Tonight :]	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Wanna know how you can get back at the CW for delaying this week 's SPN Smallville ? Watch Community tonight on NBC , .	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home f ." and got Part 4-Room five ! Try it 
" Therefore do not worry about tomorrow , for tomorrow will worry about itself . Each day has enough trouble of its own ." .	 
. that the gov putting money in their pocket will be gone tomorrow ? Then what ? 
Social Media Today If You Connect with Website Visitors They Will Convert The Problem With Most Websites A lot . 
hmm haven't looked at my neck today I wonder if my art work is gone	 
your a pretty bird today aren't u !	 
man smh . What 's good tonight	 
So is still going on but I'm in bed , early start etc . Was a great show tonight , good bands , atmos , etc . Review to follow . shortly .	 
picking up a telephoto lens for the college basketball game tomorrow , I needed to have one anyway . hope it makes me some money !	 
Had a great time yesterday at this event for expats . Enjoyed talking with newer and older expats 
Best main event ive seen in ages , you guys raised the roof , thanks for such a wonderful night	 
" Nothing tastes better than a beer on a weekday afternoon , when 99.8 % of people are at jobs they hate ." - Casey ( wat .	 
just watched this WEAK video of these WEAK Tampa rappers from last night . smh clown city !	 
Today was a 	 
I cant concentrate on any my homework tonight i havent even started my PreCalc hw . Ugh .	 
Fabulous February Frenzy Stay in a 2 or 3 Bedroom Apartment for the crazy low price of $150 per night for a . 
haha . Ya you should read more . Helps alot . I 1st pregnancy time read alot . From books to magazines  
Senate reject changes to filibuster rules The filibuster lives on . The Senate voted overwhelmingly late Thursday to . 
WWRY Tour tomorrow night plus BIG weekend in London next week.I'm too excited to sleep !	 
We can do it all , all night girl ( 
how did the QA go ? Looking forward to recording ! Will get on forum later this evening !	 
Best friend on American Idol tonight . Watch it up .	 
Another big game tonight Heat vs Knicks . Wonder how much smack talk Spike Lee is gonna do . Heat are favorites by 3 . 
Maybe this year SUGIZO will pass by in Brazil with X JAPAN . YOSHIKI announced today that the tour in South America is still in negotiation .	 
We take that back . ' s new comedy series in the O.N.E. of is Sat , not tomorrow 
Social Media Today If You Connect with Website Visitors They Will Convert The Problem With Most Websites A lot . 
so you'd wake up in the middle of the night to see if he came on twitter ?	 
We'll be installing in Kent on Monday . Just preparing the system .	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Morning Japan , Malaysia ! and the rest of the world 	 
Lecturing to the San Mateo Dental Society tonight . Should be fun ! Not getting home until 1 AM . not as much fun 
U can't control what others think of U . But U can control U if U can sleep at night , that 's what matters .	 
I'm not about to play with in America today !	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
Social Media Today If You Connect with Website Visitors They Will Convert 
Social Media Today If You Connect with Website Visitors They Will Convert The Problem With Most Websites A lot . 
Social Media Today If You Connect with Website Visitors They Will Convert The Problem With Most Websites A lot . 
I was sleep.I'm not feeling like myself today but I will be okay .	 
Yao Ming voted to the All-Star game , yet has been out for the year since mid-December . Way to vote retards !	 
Social Media Today If You Connect with Website Visitors They Will Convert The Problem With Most Websites A lot . 
Tell me about it This night turning shitty	 
A mole can dig a tunnel 300 feet long in just one night !	 
You may not always end up where you thought you were going but you will always end up where you were meant to be .	 
Show tomorrow at Popeyes Pub w/ and some other awesome bands ! Doors are at 6pm , lets get reckless !	 
Police name suspect in Bayview slaying San Francisco police asked for the public 's help today . 
i love it when you're bored  oh and may I say that you are very nice to your fans ! 	 
I've been mad busy but neither do u and I was just talking about how mch I miss u today in class to kid lol	 
Night night possums x x x x x	 
. and of course u no his sister TIERA jus sat thr . lmao	 
RE News Home sales Signed contracts up 2 percent in December 
Home sales Signed contracts up 2 percent in December Boosted by foreclosures , sales index increase is fifth in . 
RE News Home sales Signed contracts up 2 percent in December 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
new Jersey Shore tonight .	 
she can . i asked her today !	 
RE News Home sales Signed contracts up 2 percent in December 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
I might have to go to Manchester to see them on the 1st	 
" Major protest planned for friday " and " Mubarak cracks down on Friday "; This is going to be " interesting " in the chinese sense of the word .	 
So our lovely show Saturday draws near . We hope all of you come out to see us play . It 's going to be fun !	 
playing with a puppy today made me want one 	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Yeah I saw that last night . Funny stuff . You know with all the drugs he 's had , eventually his body was gonna say " Help me !"	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
One of these days you'll clue in to the fact that I add Exlax to your portion every night . 
i thought i replied to you , but i says I didnt , but I'm not in London until Tuesday love !.	 
Good morning all , good morning my beloved prince 
Watched Blazing Saddles last night , I'd forgotten just how hilarious it is , Mel Brooks FTW	 
Hmm . Some may say I just smashed my iPhone screen to pieces . I however see it as an elegant web of hairline fractures . A work of art . 
Let us then approach the throne of grace with confidence , so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need	 
The female may not be with you very much , but her affections are steadfast and you are always on her mind .	 
Ohh this year I started august 11 but sometimes I start on different days( :	 
Humbled and Thankful to have sold 10 vehicles today .	 
I'm at my mothers homeless shelter bored as eva , I never knew that the U of M was that huge , I love it thou .! I cant wait til May 21,201 1 .!	 
Two great shows on tonight , Tvd and jersey shore . yep I'm pretty freakin excited !	 
thanx for the help have a great night	 
Just starting . First time at learned they're celebrating their 30th year . Go !	 
This Week 's Fastest Growing Facebook Applications Today we once again look at the applications to . 
Thanks for and support to find 4th vegan hobby chef	 
High Five will be proud . and I are having haggis with our meal tonight !	 
Soo hungry ! My night class cuts right through my meal time ! Food is the only thing on my mind right now . what should I get ? 	 
phew ! :' D Sunday is great ! Gives me time to find materials !	 
its Comedy Night tonight at . last week was DUMB funny . make sure yall come out tonight !	 
What the heck . My apparently just went to my replies all on it 's own . It 's acting all funky today .	 
I haven't gotten a haircut since July 	 
. drinking ? Party ? Bar ? That 's a better way to spend this evening .	 
I heard bruh what we doin tonight	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
think I'ma treat myself and the fam to some dinner tonight , since I'm in a good mood lol . cherish this moment .	 
of course ! Was just upset u didn't the pic I sent 2 u earlier today . Sometimes the only way 2 get a response is to provoke one !	 
I envy U . Shorts T in January ? That 2 me sounds like dream weather . It 's freezing here . We have more snow on the way 2 . Crap !	 
I get the same stupid idea at about the same interval . I bought a mega-millions ticket yesterday . I just like daydreaming .	 
Remember when there used to be a party EVERY Thursday 
can't say . Too identifiable . Stressful night though , then trying to put happy face on for the next ' emergency'.	 
Haha , oh zach . Well , I hope he can get it right in April 	 
your acid track is bangin ! ) played it yesterday . 
I think I am going to start Boardwalk Empire tonight .	 
40 Minute conversation over what time in the week we can arrange night for . 
" 21st century " new music video me 
probably shouldn't admit a lack of work on twitter either ! Honestly I have been working hard , just not today !	 
I was just lookin at n goin at it they is very funny but moment for cumin on today yea 
Warning , may cause itchiness , dizziness , nausea and vomiting if not watched regularly .	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
. had a great time with the ladies in Zumba class tonight ! Got my dvds in the mail so now I can do it at home !  shower bed ;	 
FYI - The Seattle Art Museum , Seattle Asian Art Museum and Olympic Sculpture Park pavilion will be closed January . 
continually reminding myself that Christ is sufficient for everything . Need some extra strength tonight .	 
not in last week . will be in tomorrow . will you ? yes , miss you !	 
Check this video out -- 2nd Annual Fly 's The Limit Jerkin Competition Promo via 
Bob Seger is back Michigan rocker to kick off new tour in March Bob Seger performs at Van Andel Arena in 2006 . 
Quick re-post of my NYC photo montage from last night ! Snowiest Jan on record here in NYC !	 
Currently eating may fave Chessy Baked Potato from The Sandwich Guy as an early morning snack ! yum~ yum~ !	 
FOREX-Yen nursing losses , euro best of bad bunch By Wayne Cole SYDNEY , Jan 27  - The yen nursed broad . 
cool beans hope your going to be listening tomorrow got a surprise up my sleeve for tomorrow 	 
Since it didnt happen last friday -_-	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home from ." and got Part 6-Jess ?! Try it 
Are you already in PHL or traveling tomorrow . Know you told me before , but I forgot .	 
Studying for my last exam tomorrow and after that im free from prision i mean school	 
Hey stinky ?! What happened to my txt bk today ?	 
Haha I may or may not wish I were on your level  
JOB putting on a show today  .	 
Destroying Glucagon Receptors May Cure Diabetes Interesting . But CJ 's comment raises a good question .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
" How To Stay Free " The 10th and final chapter in Milton Friedman 's " Free to Choose " series 
I'd love to talk cyberlaw with you while you're here in town , hope to see you Saturday .	 
you spoiled my surprise/joke . Weren't we supposed to get burgers tonight ?	 
Say you won't forget and I'll be ok , at least tonight ; it 's just you and me and honestly that 's everything I need .	 
Anyone else get hit today with issues caused by changing the URI's?	 
im heading to swan hill today as well	 
22 points and 16 rebounds a game and Kevin Love may not make the all-star game ? Yet Gasol 's 19 and 11 is better ?	 
What time today ?	 
New hot tub arrived yesterday , already hot enough to enjoy ! This wannabe triathlete is gonna soak some sore muscles ! 
My 23rd day coming up . hmm where should I celebrate in Atlanta or NY ? Hmmm,I'm tryna do both . tough decision :/	 
We went to Mud Puppies today got all clean handsome ! Now if the weather would just cooperate so we can get our pictures done Sunday !	 
I can NOT wait to go out tonight ! I need a damn martini .	 
Hertiage and growth ? Open house tonight for New West 's new civic centre . 8pm at the Westminster C . 	 
. I know ! He 's smarter than I . He mentioned that to me today . Why didnt I think of that 	 
did anyone watch tonight ?	 
Its friday thats , unless you have a 
I put in an early request with for tomorrow . I have to have her help  
I know ! I can't wait to see you ! We are meeting at McGee 's Pub 55th and 8th .	 
Thanks for the yummy REN stuff , used the new cleansing balm and serum tonight . Divine 	 
Men 's bball needs your help tonight against Boise State ! Let 's pack the Pan Am ! Game time is at 7pm ! Let 's go .	 
But she only signed to Sept . I wonder if she is hoping for a writers change ?	 
Studying my life away tonight for finals . Joy .	 
ur actually one my fav actors , have been for quite some time , since 6th man Senseless . Hater 's gonna hate F**K Them !	 
At school with my buddies its friday 
FOREX-Yen nursing losses , euro best of bad bunch By Wayne Cole SYDNEY , Jan 27  - The yen nursed broad . 
And after having spent the day together , hold each other close the whole night through 	 
We love the BOF ! Check out their exclusive from today . 
Nothing better go wrong today	 
while I failed at wanting to be a pharmacy tech Id thank the poor whom it may concern typing this if they could get me a pr job .	 
Was going to watch Skins but far too tired , so saving that for tomorrow after work . Nighty night Twitter	 
Music Video Casting Call ! Friday !  Click to read original post 
I'm pretty sure the freak that put the extra ' r ' in February is the same guy who thought up the spelling for Wednesday .	 
if u don't fuck on the 1st nite	 
Glad tomorrow is Friday	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home f ." and got Part 4-Room five ! Try it 
Long day . Let 's hope for better tomorrow !	 
Wednesday 's PGA Demo Day Orange County National began under grey skies , then the winds picked up , the sun shone the dimpled spheres flew	 
I have sushi for dinner tonight . Yum	 
Tomorrow I'll provide the answer ! But , I'd like to hear your speculation and which race would I choose ! It will be SHOCKING !	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 227	 
weekend thousands of determined Brits are going to march in Luton in support of the . htt .	 
And a big well done to for putting on such a good night .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Choose always the way that seems the best , however rough it may be ; custom will soon render it easy and agreeable . - Pythagoras	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Kid soaked every pair of underpants today . Success yesterday , lots of laundry today .	 
The night til young time for me an my girls to go out lol( :	 
Twitter is so not interesting my right now . bout to get off . may be back later	 
What 's ur fave wine to drink on a hot day ? Head to the for this Sun - it'll be a few deg cooler up there :D	 
Virgin Racing 's launch of its MVR-02 will take place at BBC Television Centre on February 7 BE THERE .	 
i Got a lot uf bLinks today ;D i blinked you ( ;	 
Proud Auntie moment she just turned 4 this week My baby joined our children 's choir church today ! A proud mother moment .	 
When LL Cool J passes away , everyone should be a ladies man in the morning and night , but go hard in the afternoon 
New Daisy May treasury ! 
My mom wants to take me on a cruise for my 21st . where should I go ?	 
Hey John , you looked really strong today ! Now go out and get it Friday too ! I want to see you in the final group on Sunday .	 
Working hard again tonight , but the end is in sight . at least for a couple days	 
also sat and played angry birds . haha ! I'm sure would be so proud lol	 
Going to get headshots next friday . ( Hunger games , here i come .	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at . January 27 , 2011 , 5:31 pm	 
Saw the Nashville Predators last night . Check out their roster . Hornqvist plays a lot taller . 
Here 's a taste of our EP that dropped in Nov 
not sure cause I might go with my mom to do taxes on Saturday =T	 
Clearly everyone who stayed in last night decided to come out tonight . Wtf huge rush ?	 
Basketball game tonight . 7-it 's over . And there 's JV before that . Better then nothing .	 
2 hr delay again tomorrow shits beat I shud have off	 
seen all these nice valentine gifts today , if I had a valentines I would treat him right .	 
good job today !	 
good morning dear ! Happy friday ! =D	 
Idc who gets mad tonite I'm all in 
Planning a women 's art show  and a very full schedule of accompanying workshops and even .	 
Thursday please follow .	 
My professor was born on February 29th . 
I need to use somebody car to take my road test on tomorrow	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Good idea . Will u b OK another night ?	 
I feel like . Chinese tonight !	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Smh dumb people . I cant wait to go to school tomorrow .	 
That snow from yesterday cut into my plans for tomorrow since we gettin out at 1:00 now . gess I gotta improvise	 
My shoes are in Kentucky and should be here by Tuesday and no I am not going to obsessively track them the whole time .	 
I'm early today what !	 
So I finally unpacked everything today , color coded my closet , filled my drawers to the tip top did laundry BUT there 's still one flaw .	 
Columbus is way too small . found out an old friend/college classmate is friends w/the sister of a girl i just met last Saturday . weird .	 
i may have a possible idea . text/call/bat signal me	 
23 seniors studying relationships last night at Campaigners . 
unfortunately I do haha you all have picture taking thing tomorrow ?	 
Dinner for today is a turkey pastrami sandwich and pineapples . YUM	 
Beyond scared straight comes on tonight  I hope its good !	 
please make my dream come true , and allow me to see on this Tuesday ! right ?! 3	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 228	 
Still tired as crap but the night is young and full of romance lol	 
reunion special tonight ! I love my ' Housewives'!	 
We may not be friends anymore , but i wont forget the memories . 
hey ! Thanks ! You can pre-order the album in 2 weeks or u can wait and buy it on iTunes in March ! Thanks for your support !	 
Know it 's sitting there all alone ? And then tomorrow , I'm just going to have to throw it out ? Too much to bear , too much .	 
We had a bowling party 4 the boys 6th this year ! has a cute invite w/ fun retro colors ! ht .	 
cool !  I'm going to sleep now , so talk tomorrow  xx	 
My dvr has it highlighted . If it doesn't record it I'll look for it on saturday . Thanks for the heads up 	 
Law of Attraction in Action Jealousy - Lessons from a Recovering .Today is Day 24 of my 31 Days of Self-Lov . 
I joined The Fan 960 this afternoon to talk . Listen to that interview here . 
The announced today that O.J. Mayo of the has been suspended without pay for 10 games for violating	 
When the night comes , look at the sky . If you see a falling star , don't wonder why , just make a wish . Trust me ,  
last saturday of march 
What up Pocatello , Idaho ! We're jammin tonight at the Elks Lodge . Come on out and snowball fight Tony .	 
just startin on this project thats due tomorrow smh	 
Imma go read a book and learn something , b/c i sucked bigtime on jeopardy today	 
Started my morning reading Tom Ford 's article that sounds all too familiar . Like reading our own story Have the best Friday guys	 
pretty much ! I wonder if he'll take it tomorrow !	 
We are still Alive and Rocking ! Recording with Legendary Producer Jack Douglas ! Coach house show this Saturday with Marcy Playground !	 
Had a Pam Grier/Michael Pare flick called STRIP SEARCH turn up in today 's mail . Had never even heard of it .	 
Update Former S . African leader Nelson Mandela , recovering from collapsed lung , could be released from hospital Frida .	 
I don't think you would make it ! Save it for another road trip  Hope counting to ten worked :/ night .	 
i wish i had a ipod touch so i could get the pink friday app 	 
medical building will probably come down in April so they can start work on Central Phase 2 then	 
vampire diaries tonight 33333	 
Tonight 5 ! A viewer finds what she thinks is an animal 's head in a can of veggies frm a local store . What do u think it is ? Tweet it 2 us !	 
get da job 1st dat way YU ain't got to	 
why is there a january premium ? wouldn't more clubs bidding up the price ? 	 
Somehow , I can't be too upset when there 's something wrong w/ my car . I think the scruffy mechanic may have something to do w/ it .	 
we BETTER have school tomorrow . -_-	 
Good night everyone . Sweet dreams xoxo	 
Just remembered that we have a non school uniform day tomorrow . Haven't a clue what to wear	 
In other news , I'm concerned I may be coming down with something - have that odd tell-tale chemical taste in my mouth . Gah .	 
I'm officially announcing today that I am NOT a candidate for president in 2014 - at least not on the Democratic ticket .	 
\nPowerless workers head to Starbucks Many people found themselves without power after last night 's storm , a . 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those hot flashes , night sw . 
hosting at . Scoreless in the 1st . Listen live on . 
Date night with Lara	 
I was missin ' my long lost friend last night // A Heartfelt Ditto .	 
man library goin hard tonight .	 
As Physical Demand Slows , Price of Gold Goes Down Thursday saw the price of spot gold go lower brought about by . 
Wait until the sun goes down . ---- we gon ' make this bitch light up	 
coming to the Nashville , TN January 29 . Get there !	 
Amanda Holden proudly shows up her baby bump for the 1st time Holocausto	 
hm . I have a phone interview for a job in San Diego tomorrow .	 
The new Vampire Diaries comes on tonight =)	 
Today is the 25th anniversary of the Challenger disaster . What a price those 7 souls and the U.S. paid for NASA 's failure to communicate .	 
good morning ! Am going wet market with mummy O . o	 
Sigh No More is gonna get me thru work tonight . Love . This .  
dudes u kno u wanna rock out Pasadena with us lol hit us up if your down by tonight we gotta let the venue know u get $ via doors	 
You don't have to go out every night to be happy . Some times you've just got to lay in bed and think of the little .	 
I hate waking up to a cold morning . Makes me want stay in bed all day .	 
HOME ! and grabbed a massive Indian Takeaway on the way . I know it 's late but I didn't have dinner . TECH TOMORROW !	 
seen all these nice valentine gifts today , if I had a valentines I would treat him right .	 
on the sun . ---- the suns on lol yeah pretty much lol	 
I thought it was at Christa 's tomorrow ?	 
Well , back to work tomorrow . Grateful to get a day off due to the .	 
I just woke up . Good afternoon ? 	 
I really wanted to watch tonight 's episode on-line anyone knows where I can do it ? PLEASEEEEE	 
I went out today , never felt so _____ in my life .	 
I'll see you tomorrow ! Even THOUGH you didn't come to my birthday party !	 
I think this twitter thing is just being slow this night . -_-	 
West Coast Carriers On This Day  
Wishing a safe journey to my new lovely friend . May she have a safe journey back home . Hope to see her again someday	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
is a prolific once-in-a-generation songwriter . Catch him on tour in Feb w/Scott Hutchison of . They play Feb 23	 
have a great friday kak ^^ Morning too ,, have a good day good morning muba kak 
Reminder Tomorrow night I will be video djing the Friday night in town The Atrium Lounge " Blush Fridays " located DT 6th and Broadway	 
It 's so cold ! i'm gonna snuggle up in bed now n get warm ! night X	 
Hopefully we'll get the first Scream 4 TV Spots during Mid-March !	 
I am going to have an avocado for breakfast tomorrow . Joyous anticipation . The small pleasures  are the best !	 
happy 6 month anniversary ! You followed me 6 months ago today ! Lol	 
Things will be better tomorrow . you-know-why ;D	 
May not go to sierramont 's got talent . ) :	 
too bad my school dont go by philly district . but im off tomorrow anyway .	 
I'm going now , Meg . Have a good night . 
Goog morning , good evening . i hope you like dreaming 3	 
are you and Lana still sliding tonight ?	 
Cheap Cheerful Red Wines To Banish the January Blues 
she having a rough night haha	 
I hope y'all like it ." Thursday blues "	 
In bed now , praying for a good night 's sleep ! X	 
heyy u may not remember but u waved at me at the VMA'S last year  when I was going to see justin bieber . U and jade waved ! ( :	 
big thanks to for playing the new single Circles tonight - check it out at just after 52 . 
This week is Doug 's world famous chili for the Bentley and Syrah release and the place to be on Saturday 1/29	 
My boyfriend just left , I guess I should do my homework since we'll probably have school tomorrow . :/	 
It 's friday ! Have fun everyone !	 
. i hate night classes , especially chineese people . i cant understand . 
see you in march 	 
may be delayed , but I make sure I will have finished Chinese edition before May absolutely ! For preparing exam is more important than it .	 
Jill Lliam will be featured as a Duo Silk performance at the Church nightclub this Friday	 
I was telling yesterday that same thing about meeting people through . It 's a .	 
Let 's just . No SPN tomorrow night /3	 
Mark your calendars ! Waterfront Seattle 's Kick Off Meeting February 17th , at the Seattle Aquarium 6:30 p.m. RSVP Here 
It 's great but I reckon you'll be okay . If anything it'll drive people to the real thing  Sounds like Qype night went well !	 
Heading to downtown Nairobi , who is going to be there this afternoon ?	 
I can't wait till Tuesday when is on ! I'll be sittin at home with my eyes glued to the tv  lol	 
so you gals had fun then ? that 's awesome . i can't wait till August to come to Van !	 
We are all in our pj 's heading up to bed time story night at Jacob 's school . 
Today 's Twitter special for GDC patients only lasts til 5:20 . see previous tweet for details .	 
and on the 8th day God created my cast iron pans 	 
You're my everyday , my every night , and my every dream .	 
Ugh . Can't be arsed to go to school tomorrow .	 
Aint really ate since yesterday , should i eat	 
Great Pyramid May Hold Two Hidden Chambers Discovery News 
Ben 's aspiration of the evening , " I want to be an artist and travel the world trying different cheeses ."	 
if you want more i may be willing  )))))	 
Dude on 1st 48 look like 
Now for a new cover for Sunday 's gig .	 
off to ralphs tonight . new status comin soon .	 
a glimpse  . 
2nd ladies tech meetup is happening right now at , come meet the nerdy sisterhood	 
Lay out what you're gonna wear tonight . Good luck !	 
This Just in . On Feb 1st will be on New Music Live . in Canada	 
Oh , it 's tomorrow ! Night all	 
Well guess what friday going to be your lucky day ;D TEXTS ME	 
If you wanna make plans stop saying wyd today . Gets annoying	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
So is everybody going to watch a certain TV show tonight . hmm ?	 
man i ate like fiddy apples today lol . my tummy aint happy . haha uno wha happens when u eat too much fibre 
I'm gonna talk to ms ryan tomorrow so we can announce it ahead of time	 
I could do that but I would I have to wait until Saturday cause tomorrow my friends are coming over 	 
Busy night at work . Bleh	 
Had a good time with today . Movie was pretty cool . And Thanks for shoveling my driveway .	 
oh . huh . ok time to go . weird place to be tonight o.O . On another note , I am super happy that adam 's at disney 3	 
" How To Stay Free " The 10th and final chapter in Milton Friedman 's " Free to Choose " series 
I need moves for tonight immediately .	 
Thanks guys . Tonight is gonna be awesome . Cheers .	 
Woo got Mass Effect Redemption today in the mail - can't wait to get home and start reading !	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Having an iphone since forever has spoiled me ! I got a flip phone loaner today from and it 's killin ' me , smalls . 
Out of all the days in a month , you might have 29 fantastic days but there'll always be just 1 day that everything goes wrong . That 's today .	 
o ok i thought u would of been partying in the chuck tonight	 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those hot flashes , night sw . 
oops totally forgot about the meeting tonight .	 
Wavin thank u dear ! Thursday Tag 's  .	 
Gonna go to bed before I collapse , got a long day ahead of me tomorrow and I need my rest . Good Night Everyone !	 
My first tweet . woohoo ! My other half just came thru  . Jersey Shore tonight ! =)	 
So happy to be done with today .	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
In January the people of South Sudan voted on whether their region would separate from the North . Read more about . ht .	 
Anyone watch idol last night ? This story really got to me . 
There we have it then - Monday 7th February for - what does the hash thing do exactly ?	 
grab the chance today	 
Our indignation at Chelsea Re Torres is how Ajax feel about our low bids for Suarez . We are naive if we think we will get him cheap in Jan .	 
just got home . lest than an hour trip from manila to our house here in pasig . yay for no traffic . lol good morning	 
Tomorrow at noon Central time the world will know !	 
Nobody told me Happy Birthday today . But that 's okay cuz it 's not my birthday( :	 
Why you may want to pay attention to what The Trump Network is about to do . Get info from veterans .	 
I can't wait for tomorrow when Titan Insider reports Fisher has been let go	 
Ok let 's do this . Single number 1 ' Commit The Crime ' due for release in Feb ! Finally !	 
February is going to be Romeos month 	 
good luck for today .	 
Rhino blog news Quarterly Ontario Solar Summit , February 8 Ontario Solar Network invites you to attend their Q . 
going to go to sleep now so that I will actually get up in the morning LOL ! helping  
Freehold Fire District Meeting Live Video by Colleen Curry on Jan 27th Comment Print | Email Members of the Fr . 
Sarah Palin 's e-mails are coming out May 31 . No , THIS time they mean it ! 
Just got home bad morning but get better during the day ! :D Now to finish the Microbe Mission cheat sheet !	 
I knew was gonna be mayor 1st time i seen him on TV . people think they have an actual choice . lol .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Watched two full seasons of how i met your mother today LEGEN . wait for . DARY ! LEGENDARY !	 
This week is Doug 's world famous chili for the Bentley and Syrah release and the place to be on Saturday 1/29	 
For all of you that cant get to St . Augustine Tune In Friday Night 
Looking forward to watching OU Baseballs home opener on Feb 18th . Until then it 's crunch time to get ready for spring trai .	 
I wish it was Saturday and I was drunk having an awesome time with my amazing friends . 	 
I was bumping the best of 2010 mixtape to class today . !	 
16 of february is the b-day of could you send a happy b-day to him ? he is a big fan of yours !	 
lunch today was weird , but I feel alone at school , honestly .	 
whole world invited icc world cup in BANGLADESH 19th february ,,,,,,,,,	 
Excited to get some distraction in tomorrow . Going to see Tangled with my nieces !	 
Getting familiar with Scottish beers tonight . Hello malts . lots of'um.	 
come kiss me , come w/ me down the hall , to my bedroom , tonight we'll be making love faces .	 
so tuesday , apparently that snotty weirdo stole mom 's homework from the teacher 's " to be returned pile " and took it home ! Then told mom	 
are you ready for tomorrow ?! Lol	 
Tomorrow after class humanities homework with mariela then at night ice skating with steph some other niggas ~~	 
cool , I am still catching up on all that i missed today by forgetting to take my mobile with me to work 	 
no school tomorrow ! 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Zoroaster and Weedeater to Tour Together If you desire an evening of metal that you can't categorize and is as . 
www.emigratingnz.com Hankering after New Zealand Today I find myself hankering after my life in New Zealand ! La . 
anything else  that I'd need to subscribe to , I hear the News of the World may be introducing a paywall online	 
Zoroaster and Weedeater to Tour Together If you desire an evening of metal that you can't categorize and is as . 
tow nights in a row . Probably gonna hate myself tomorrow .	 
Zoroaster and Weedeater to Tour Together If you desire an evening of metal that you can't categorize and is as . 
BBC News - Nelson Mandela spends second night in hospital 
yeah going to be at the show in nyc tomorrow	 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 3	 
Today 's gonna be lazy day 	 
we better have school tomorrow i'm serious i need to get me weed	 
Soon-ish - got a week in March . Not sure what doing though . You ?	 
Just completed my first prayer vigil . I've never experienced someone I knew go missing . Hope he 's okay . wherever he is tonight .	 
Im sick my sister + her boyfriend got in a wreck today . if followed me , it'd really make my day !	 
Class is crazy boring today	 
you komin fuck with us tonite	 
You are the only one who can determine your value in this world . What have you done today to increase that value ?	 
we got tucker saturday .	 
i'm sorry i've not been around ten years , may i ask whose in the pic ? I posted a new photo to FB 
Zumba with me tonight at 6:45 pm and tomorrow night at 5:30 pm at The Matt Griffin YMCA ! Lets shake those nasty calories away !	 
LOL . i'm so bad with photos . only just uploaded some from november . i look so awkward , but i need a new default . eh .	 
Going to watch Carne  with in the middle of the night .	 
hows the little man this evening ? Nothing worse than sickies .	 
TSP fund performance for Jan 27 , 2011 now available at 
Cold day but no snow . Some snow coming tonight according to WHIO weather .	 
Received my shipment from yesterday ! Great way to brighten my snowy NY week 
" LOL,don't be sarcastic for you only drink water tonight with nothing to eat !" Im on a fast anyway . water plz	 
so you won't be going for drinks at the grackle tonight ?	 
Tonight is the last time i get to have dinner with my brother and his family . their moving to colorado on saturday . \ :	 
niggaz talkin bout fixin the power by saturday	 
US officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow 
good morning too sayang -* Good morning	 
Even if we believe everything you say in today 's column , how is it not still saying Cutler quit on his team Sunday ?	 
i'll be up all night waiting for you .	 
tonight 's plans are in heavy limbo . friday classes 
whats on tonight ?	 
Elizabeth May , leader-Green Party of Canada . " Why should we protect Mary Lake ?" A " It 's a little piece of a puzzle . Significant " 
Aww lol . Check the pic I sent you , the treatment is wicked trust me , I'm proof ! Night night my love x	 
Watchdog Americans spend 6.1 billion hours on taxes - Jan . 5 , 2011 via 
It 's Thursday night again , goin hard in da paint as usual .	 
Today has been the biggest day for Little Monsters since New Year's. .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
don't make us laugh too hard tomorrow night . 8 1/2 months pregnant , does laughter induce labor ? My husbands worried !	 
Just changed my twitter background , check it out ! Found it at on Thursday 05:23 55 PM	 
Khloe kardashian is pregnant and due in july ! Finally !	 
Check out our boys On The Contrary , Cowboys and Indians New City Lions tonight at the talent farm ! Go prepared to have your face melted !	 
" Daddy Daughter Day " at the Dome on Saturday . and I discussed , and we both agree that is a poorly named event . Yuck .	 
Thursday Tag 's .	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
does u have ur car today ?	 
is gonna be on american idol tonight	 
Do Duran Duran tour tickets go in sale tomorrow or have I just dreamt it ?	 
im finna stay over her house on saturday	 
just incase , ima be partyin the entire night before lol 2012 is not going to happen . at least i hope	 
great show today couldn't help but laugh at the lady laughing extra loud during the monologue . Am I the only one who noticed ?	 
Last night is awesome . The band , the artists , the crowd , the fireworks , the stage , EVERYTHING . Proud ust	 
don't play tonight ?	 
Sneaker heads , buy/sell/trade showcase going down in Charlotte in April . Get at me if you want a table to display your .	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
see you all next wed . Gonna be a CLASSIC ! W 
Take our poll , who 's gonna win tonight 's basketball game - or ? 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Hello twitter good morning =)	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 229	 
Great Pyramid May Hold Two Hidden Chambers A 3-D simulation of the 4,500 -year-old structure suggests an ancient . h .	 
Next Thursday I believe .	 
Gf ! And of course , where to my luv ? gf , let 's go on a date tomar , no school ! you still spending the night ?	 
Today was so blah . I feel like I have a lot to do , but absolutely no energy to do it .	 
New blog post ! Let us Californians rub in our beautiful weather just a little bit as we start in January . .	 
nothin jus seeing if you coming home tonight	 
Interesting Got my GSEC Today !Link to GIAC Professionals list . I'm near the top Thank y . Let me know your tho	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season	 
im doing ok now . s kitty , Ahnold passed away this morning . how r u girly ?	 
Today started good and now is ending bad 
Going to bed yadda yadda . See you tomorrow 	 
bout to check out that night life in atlanta	 
is coming to JMU on April 2nd . Be jealous , be very jealous	 
got the album today ! It 's great 	 
Stalk me on tumblr if you haven't already today . I got some more photos for you to reblog	 
good news is that the episode will be on or tomorrow . KSDK you suck for bumping . 
OMG . I just realized I am watching Cedric tell his tale of woe for like the 5th time . mindless escape ? No . at 5th time just dopey .	 
Just ordered 4 bottles of wine from We visited them while in Sonoma back in April . Great Syrah 
I bought a big bunch of Dunkin Donuts today for my friends .	 
I feel like somethings wrong though . He always calls me back or texts me right away , yet I haven't gotten anything today	 
This morning i am one of those disgusting woman who didnt dry her hair fully in thr bus . S	 
for what ?! u going out tonight ?	 
Work tomorrow , the usual	 
Beautiful night . Wish this moment in time could just freeze for a little longer . 
Monday tuesday and Wednesday not good . Xx	 
Sat&Sun- looking foward to these days !	 
Excited to work again ? umm . not so much . I spent today looking for other jobs lol 
bought some badass speakers today and went for a late night run . 
If I ain't rolling I may die on the floor Brazil , Morocco , London to Ibiza Straight to L.A. New York .	 
love it . please wear this tomorrow night . =P	 
You get a lot of snow last night ?	 
think its time for bed ! Sleep well all ! Night night xx	 
I love my job . They got me ice cream cup cakes a bouquet of flowers and a awesome card man I love the love makn tonight even more worth it	 
First correct guess of score tonight wins two tickets to future game in cameron . Guess now until game starts at 8 .	 
Bay of fundy ! 7th new wonder of the world ? Highest tides in the world . Wow !	 
I made a ridiculous dinner for myself tonight . 
Yes , this girl has been stalking me since September .	 
$$ Crude Oil moves higher from the end of February 
i go back next tues . 
i never sleep past ten thirty in the morning ever .	 
it 's a game tomorrow	 
probably has to do with throwing him under the bus this morning !	 
HAHAHAHA B and yo , good luck for tomorrow !	 
you listening to chihuahua love tonight ?! hehe 	 
I burned my hand making dinner tonight . 
btw check my facebook status lol you may be scared or shocked lol i think i found Georgia P 's twin	 
Done with work for today . Got a lot done .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Yes ! Fri at black cat ! If not lets lunch again soon ! Thanks for the lovely lunch ! Hope to see u around this weekend .	 
yeah , Cole just dropped that one on me yesterday , I think he agrees with you 	 
I think I did a Nadal yesterday and sweated off 2.5 kg 's just by dancing and jumping around at BDO . Crazy .	 
I got some things I've got to figure out for tomorrow	 
is the best ! Steven Tyler 's Creepy Leer of the Night via 
sorry bout the delay in streaming , been doing a couple of other things . one of them should be up today~ get excited 
I've been working on this englis presentation all afternoon long !	 
I know I know ! c'mon son I did my research ! . now let me get a dollar	 
and in the night we'll wish this never ends , we'll wish this never ends	 
ready for tonight ? My only sister ?	 
no classes tomorrow . which means i don't have to be productive . at all .  making dinner and reading . for pleasure . it 's a rare occurrence .	 
San Diego soldier ready to propose marriage ? We can HELP with the plan and the ring ! Email fanclub@robbinsbro s.c .	 
yeah they gonna email the teachers tomorrow they will tell us	 
Headed to to open up for the open house tonight .	 
Doing my homework now so tomorrow don't need to do any ! 	 
Off to bed  night twitterverse	 
School today was hard , it 's nice to spend time with after a hard day of school watching movies and eating popcorn 33	 
A look at Pink Friday star 's highlights as ' Moment 4 Life ' video debuts 
ok folks , have a good night . time to disappear .	 
- I'll be there in March so send me some promotions and amenities discounts !	 
That 's funny . Because we haven't even seen each other today .	 
Blog Post Is There Still Room for a Well Composed Email in Today 's Fast Paced World ? 
Last run before my half on Saturday ! I completed a Run for 4.00 mi in 30:53 with a 07:44 min/mile pace speed 7.8 mph . 
today bc she " forgot to bring it back "	 
How I wish but I am not going to Europe . I will be class tomorrow 
If u suspect a person is being trafficked please call the Nat'l Human trafficking hotline today 1-888-3737-888 
I am second tonight	 
you may be Spider/Woman but they have weakness and can be hurt too . Glad you are okay . Hope you become Divas Champ again xoFlo	 
First images due back for my project tomorrow - very excited . Perhaps I should go to bed .	 
na like i need to do my nails and hair for saturday lmfaooo	 
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 230	 
All handicappers play are up for tonite 's College and Pro Basketball Games . Visit Coaches Corner 's Free Consensus Daily at 
PS quite looking forward to seeing if my morphine texting/tweeting is as good as the drunk stuff ! Night . 
Hey , what games you planning on watching tonight ? Potentially the Duke/Boston College game ? Haha . 
just cooling.what 's da move in atlanta tonight	 
was part of this girls ' night out ? I can just see him in suspenders , etc 
Actually I'd be a bad body guard . I don't do the whole 3rd wheel thing .	 
Ms Gill can lick my asscrack if she thinks im learning 300 words in one night .	 
Really looking forward to getting to know the Reformer tomorrow morning with !	 
When do we find out sat scores ? 
I desperately need to study for these exams tomorrow . I hope I can stay focused	 
That sucks . We got about the same . Hofstra was like " delayed opening tomorrow " and then this morning " just kidding , no school !"	 
Teehee - got called a " sheep " and a " follower " today . He don't know me very well , do he ?  haha 
omg i love it ! i getting it tomorrow , it looks so official all GOLD and what not lol	 
We ain't stopping , we keep dropping ' till we see the sun .	 
am having such a laf dis night damn 
ok may as well do my now ok first is to my fav the one and only . only coz he my perfect bf :D	 
Shit we might not have skool tomorrow	 
congratulations on getting into the all-star game and your amazing game last night ! you're an inspiration	 
Tryna get inside your mind without that night shift	 
Ladies FREE All Night In Heels And Leggings 
Sanity may be madness but the maddest of all is to see life as it is and not as it should be . -Don Quixote hope	 
Free drinks at the Earth tonight from 9-12pm . To drink or not drink = 
Morning sweet Kiesha.It 's not long till school starts back up in NSW . Wish you could come home to star t.I know . 
well my mom gave me money if you wanna go tonight still .	 
looking forward to curling up with issue three tonight ! 
 Damn , wish I was Honda bound tomorrow .	 
that I am still friends with my ex's.We may not be together but at least he doesn't think I'm a tramp	 
All School District of Philadelphia schools are closed for Friday , January 28 !	 
Duel Terminal 4 cards have arrived . I have to upgrade the game before they can be used . Most likely that will happen tomorrow .	 
Damn you chipper morning people . 
If the last one was beyond grasp , then this one is about 10 years beyond that one . C'mon Pumper , you can get over those few humps .	 
my fit tomorrow is nice	 
I was there , great show tonight from you guys . Imagine what TV tapings would be like in Glasgow !	 
My charity water auctions end at midnight tonight 
Sleep not an option Tonight . thats like everynight tho	 
Good all-round show , no weak spots . Michael even got his hair out-Portillo'd by Imelda May . Why allow to eat into 's time slot ?	 
If any body wants too come in and work Thursday and Friday we will have a crew then too .	 
We're so having school tomorrow . Rain , sleet or snow !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I took the day off yesterday . Tomorrow ? Back at it !	 
If we play an 80 's Star Trek movie during our 80 's in April movie month , will you come in for a Q&A ?	 
I have an appointment with for all you can eat IHOP tomorrow night . Everything else in the next 24 hours is just a formality .	 
HELL YEAH lol . rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
' Don't worry , ' cause tonight I got you .'	 
The world won't end in 2012 because Harry 's kids go to Hogwarts on September 1st , 2017 . 
Well I sent it at like 1 in the morning earlier , so I'm sure he got it by now . :/ Why did I even bother tweeting him ? 
lol , people asking about the 1st line . " It doesn't matter if you love him [ a man] , or capital H-I-M [ God ] " .	 
I dunno ! all Didi said was that it was filmed ! She didn't even know if it was tonight or tomorrow  It 's on now , I'll wait 	 
today is a good say . burleigh headland over n back twice . 1 week till im 24 and 5 days till my bestie cames home !	 
Chelsea have embarrassed themselves enough for one evening . Don't come back with an improved bid r . FollowMe/MeYou Plez	 
January 27 , 2011 Urban Word of the Day --- concern troll 
We are gonna meet Martha today ! :D	 
Our friends had a special visitor to their offices today Jordin Sparks  ! 
Bf is going to get wasted tomorrow while I sit at home . Awesome .	 
night to u too hugs xx	 
Shopping may be the death of me yet	 
Ladies FREE All Night In Heels And Leggings 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
and the crew will be joining me for New York Social Media Week / February 7-11 , 2011 
 no classes today	 
Btw , do our books need to be completed by tomorrow ?	 
worry bout gettin home 1st . den worry bout all dat .	 
settling in for an evening of work , home cooking , new 	 
Actors Theatre courts late-night crowd Actors Theatre of Louisville 's " Late Seating " series will hold its first . 
Gino The Lone Gunmen playing tonight at The Cellar ! And we have our amazing Lobster Mac Cheese . See you tonight !	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Bed time , can't stop thinking about stuff tho . WIll try sleep ! Night x x x	 
Thank you to everyone in LA who came out last night and made our party at Bardot so so awesome . Special thanks to . 
I'll make love to you , like you want me to , and I'll hold you tight baby , all through the night .	 
woop woop ! have a great time babe  and hope you enjoyed meeting up with Storm today  x	 
SO happy , i got to tell you that is coming to Tuesday , Feeling the positive energy is .	 
Excited about tomorrow ! 	 
Mike Patton and share a birthday . They are 43 and 42 , respectively , today . 
I have a free first tomorrow . I'll probably doze in the library . xD	 
Us officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow	 
" Montgomery County Public Schools are closed tomorrow  due to emergency weather conditions and power loss ." WOOOHOOOOO	 
Yes . We finally had snow day again ! Today was so needed .	 
EJ 's Shoes to open new store near Galleria . plans to open a 9500-square-foot EJ 's Shoes in March in a former . 
I don't want to go to school tomorrow .	 
The Strokes releasing fourth album , Angles , on March 18 in Australia . They were awesome at Splendour last year !	 
Good morning everyone !,,	 
exactly . US hypocrisy won't go unnoticed across the world tonight .	 
6th Lady Gaga-related trending topic today 12th in seven days .!	 
eBay UK . Special deal savings today at eBay UK online store . 
Hey 1 Sol Divas ! Here 's our 8th video of randomly selected photos of some entries  
, it 's my 16th birthday , and you following me is the only thing I want  3 231	 
Have your ears been burning today ? Was singing your praises to xx	 
All night . curtly , peering inside* Can I see her now ?	 
rocsi actually looks cute today . team	 
Reminder - Starting at 8 p.m.  Miami at New York 
Will miss you too . Probably catch you tomorrow , if I'm about . 	 
We have our opening night tickets for Arsenic and Old Lace for $8 and wine tasting from Wildwood Cellars 
Official high in today .  
Hey baby ! How are you doing this evening ?	 
Sun be HYPED nowadays like he back in Tyra LMAO	 
YES . Finished writing first revisit . Hopefully recording tomorrow , and gonna go " work on the cover art . 	 
Almost the weekend and looking forward to seeing my sis . Curry and beer will also help ! Good night all	 
You're my Sun shine in my the Rain :D	 
no school tomorrow for MoCo !	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Wow . It must still be pretty bad out there . School just got canceled for tomorrow . I wish there was a map of how much of the town was clear .	 
They are on Netflix Instant , so I have to limit my intake . The other night I was so amped up I couldn't get to sleep .	 
Wondering the same thing every February ! he never even plays for his own team why would he play in the all star game !?!	 
I feel like I wasted today .	 
Egypt 's protesters gear up for big Friday rallies CAIRO - Egypt 's grass-roots protest movement got a double boo . 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
I am , back from the 1st dive . Liberty was okay , but I did get to see a few ornate ghost pipefish too  )	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
First lady Army health initiative may be a model 
[ news ] Egypt 's protesters gear up for big Friday rallies CAIRO - Egypt 's grass-roots protest movement got a dou . 
just one of those days . don't take it personal . night	 
Park Street Patio tonight.who 's coming with ?	 
Follow + to enter to our $10 Gift Card tonight .	 
Today was weird in PE . I didn't like it . I'd rather've ran a straight up mile	 
i will be in Beaverton/Hillsboro saturday morning . 
Tech Vodafone remains silent as access goes down ahead of Friday protests - 
Spirit day tomorrow ( ;	 
From 6-9 tonight , it 's TOURNAMENT PLAYER NIGHT ! Come out for a fast paced , fun night . coming up soon ; details on . 
Me and the band covering " I Want It That Way " by BSB Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 26 look at 
already thinkin bout friday 's class smh	 
shut upp oo man i hope has scool tomorrow so e can be blown out the ass	 
hey guys , we never got that call from wholesale . 	 
Its a night of worship tonight ! Been waiting all day for this gathering  
hopefully it can entertain me at the gym tomorrow x	 
no school tomorrow ! 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 33	 
Anyone complaining about missing freddie needs to watch the 1st 2nd series and be re introduced to maxxie , chris and tony . 
did any other fans encounter same " off " pockets of fans I did on Tuesday ? . twitter fans 1st class	 
Flying to Vegas Sunday for the PODi . If you are attending , let me know , and let me know what you want to see at the show !	 
I might head over Thurs night and stay with a friend , would be a early morning otherwise	 
I know how you feel , I've spent many an early morning watching ! 
Happy Thursday ! Church tonight .  Looking forward to it .	 
tonight playing solo over at 5th Ave TAP ROOM here in Tallahassee . 9pm	 
her ridiculous pout , managing to pull the look off and still appear dashingly sexy* It 's /my/ turn tonight !	 
ProJ On Friday afternoon 100,000 ' s of Egyptians will head to mosques , many will join protests ,. 
could you PLEASE follow tomorrow ? It 's really important .	 
roast chicken with dijon sauce - Roasted Chicken with Dijon Sauce Adapted from Gourmet , March 2008 T . 
Had a productive snow day ; ready to spend the rest of the night with 
Reminder - Young Antiques tonight at the 529 in East Atlanta ! Show starts about 9pm .	 
See y'all at the rock show tonight ?	 
Tonight is Ladies Night from 10pm- 2am ! Girls , and any guy wearing a woman 's wig , get $1 drafts and Jungle Juice .	 
Ate too much for yesterday dinner at pizza hut , I'm still very full for breakfast !	 
Overheard Conversations with my mother - Nicole You still coming to see Questlove with me on Saturday ?. 
A federal government official has confirmed that she will serve as commencement speaker on May 7th at SUNO . She will be revealed tomorrow .	 
Found my outfits imma wear for Friday n Saturday now I can do my paperwork when I get home	 
ProJ I suspect the internet cutoff is just a fraction of what the government has in store for Friday . . 
I'll see you all in the morning . Early start for the gym ! Night x	 
I was suppose to see you today	 
O shit today payday !	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
May 8 when are u coming to GA bruh ?!	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
" I almost hit this dude on a bike today shouldn't have been in my way " blind ass	 
Ate so much today i feel sick . ='(	 
posted how u doing today ?	 
it 's just going to make me want more tattoos which I can hardly afford . Stil , l I'm booked for a new one in feb 	 
Who wants to take me go dinner tonight	 
Nebraska 's Oct 8 game against Ohio State , the first Big Ten game at Memorial Stadium , will also be NU 's homecoming . 
Hey , something came up tomorrow . Are you free tonight ?	 
Today is the day ! Come down and join us for the welcome to country smoke ceremony at 10:45 am .	 
Every saturday is Simpson Saturday  in my house 3	 
if u don't fuck on the 1st nite	 
Come to three of clubs at 7PM tonight ! I'm doing stand up for a Montreal showcase .	 
's got the magazine ! We'll be calling it just though . Let us know what you think . Launch Feb . 18th . 
new episode of archer tonight NEW EPISODE OF ARCHER watch it because its a funny show	 
thanks im gonna look into them today then	 
Its nice to wake up in the morning , knowing that ITS FRIDAY ! yippee ! 	 
night twitter ! . i really do love you 's boys . xxxxxxx	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
Supernatural NOT returning tomorrow night . Stay tuned for details	 
If you drop it in atl you may be shot ! send me that cat daddy Dutch remix . I'm doing a set in the atl . Lol	 
Anybody want a go at convincing me I should leave my house tonight ? Your obstacles tired , sore , broke , cranky .	 
haha that'll never happen  I just can't sleep , I stay up till like 3 every night haha	 
Another Year , Barney 's Version , and Biutiful all starts playing in theaters in the area this friday . i've got a lot of movie-watching to do	 
These tears fall for you . . Feb 7th	 
Our CSA sign up and payment can now be done on line . Thanks to our great web masters at Third Sun Productions for . 
Oh for February to roll around . Bar the odd slip , I'd really appreciate four weeks without Vimto .	 
If you wake up every morning then you have YOU to live for .	 
i feel bad for making fun of someone last night . 
irritated beyond belief . today took a WHACK turn	 
Well , more snow on the way tonight and nothing to do but on the computer .	 
I missed the good morning so good evening !	 
Starting Friday with Dutch Lady chocolate milk ! Better than Meiji's.	 
Crysis 2 review Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 29 look at 
Who 's waiting for tonight , directed by ? I sure am ! Woot !	 
No orders on Amazing beads yet either . Unusual for a Thursday ? Come on everybody peeps ! www.amazingbeads.net Its Free Shipping Worldwide .	 
I listened to my friends out in Westlake/ThousOaks thought it was going to be warm today . It wasn't and now I'm chilled from open windows	 
5th Feb Library read-ins planned across the country | Counterfire 
the amazingly talented has published his first  photo book , . buy it today ! ht .	 
Good night all  sleep well , don't have nightmares about Katie Hopkins	 
Feelin a lil better . Might try to go to school tomorrow	 
New music from " Outta Here " ft prod . by Heart Failure drops in Feb 
Tiger Airways Fly from Jakarta to Singapore from IDR 62,500 one way via 
I got ISS tomorrow for skipping , 
does owen dig in your ribs at night ? Noah lives in the top of my ribs while I'm laying down	 
I listened to my friends out in Westlake/ThousOaks thought it was going to be warm today . It wasn't and now I'm chilled from open windows	 
Got some fresh ink this evening . Bleeding like whoa . Pix later .	 
Look . It 's Friday . What can we do with it ? Nice end to the working week ? When I get up I'll decide . Until then , suggestions would ne welcome	 
just started compressing the videos of event on Wednesday - very large files - hope YouTube will take them	 
I love my sissy ! I know you can't wait to see me tomorrow lol 	 
18 pages of math homework tonight . Great . Tonight is going to be a long , boring night .	 
Lake Mono Alien Human Skin is on Almost Everyone - vide . Most responded in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 30 look at 
The sun doesn't stop shining on awesome	 
Doin my on saturday . totally lifted in joy right now !	 
I feel the pain from the back of my head right until my neck . I suspect my brother secretly punch me last night .	 
My housemates gonna go in on tonight LMAO should I join them ? Yes and I will join YOU lol	 
/ SMILE QUOTES / Some times ur existence gives hope to one person , Your smile may be a pearl for someone , Your pr	 
i wont be in tomorrow .	 
Wouldn't it be nice if all night I was in you	 
That new PSP looks pretty cool . I may pick one up eventually . I just hope it gets better support game-wise this time around . .	 
Titans coach got FIRED today . Get out from under your rock , hippie	 
I think I've watched a documentary on the Solar System every day since Monday . Gotta love a documentary series on space . :D	 
Good night world .	 
Today was a lazy day . Excited for the weekend !	 
Great crowd at the event this evening . Thanks again for the taxi ride - so cold in London tonight !	 
These cards have been ugly early tonight in this tournament ! 
Looking down on tomorrow .	 
Are you the same child that called me last night ?	 
is making sloppy passes tonight in honor of fallen comrade Korie Lucious 
he 's trying to get the shed details finished this morning so it will go up on our land whilst he 's away , he 's being .	 
woo ! that was a good little work out . i guess i'll start coming every Tuesday Thursday .	 
Lecture with Kevin Kelly , Author and Founding Editor of WIRED Magazine tonight in SF 
Brandom Today I choose to be better , not better than you , but better than I've ever been before !	 
Jenkins with another 3 for Hofstra , He has 15 on the night so far	 
Buckhead for a night of surprises !	 
got my big test tomorrow .	 
I may not be perfect but I deal with me daily , some days I get it right some I don't but I always keep working .	 
It was last night	 
Saw this downtown today . craving some cupcakes now 
Yay ! I will smile when I see u tonight  Be sure to smile today . It feels good and people like it ! 
Lol I love steak . Well mine was low yesterday . I want some now with brocoli !	 
love them evening showers .	 
i sent an email on january 24 concerning the redline  and to date the reply has been loud silence . so .	 
1st time at w/ I was impressed - great decor , lrg amt of food , the best ice cream desserts !	 
philly got off tomorrow . He better bring his sexy self on over .	 
Support Union Rescue Mission see my friend perform TONIGHT 9:00 PM Skinnys'. in NoHo 
He does , I was noticing that the other night how long his hair is . CUT IT ! I'm a barber	 
yea we had like 2 of em last night . And they still made us go to school .	 
Know someone getting married ? Join us this Sunday ! So much fun and energy in one spot !	 
think i was asking about that " secret " tattoo lol . and that 's understandable but i'll be seein ya tomorrow then	 
it seems solid enough to work . it may not completely fix the economy but it should nudge it in the right direction	 
Thank you Amy . It 's been damn near impossible to have a conversation today	 
Bout to get a lot off the head tonight . .	 
in 2010 the 8th most stressful job in the US , says careercast.com Details 
Ferrari will take the wraps off the first 2011 Formula 1 car to break cover at their Maranello base on Friday . 
Anyone else watching LIFE IN A DAY on YouTube tonight ?	 
bre u gon come to my party my b-day tommorow but da party saturday 
Boeheim says SU didn't quit Tuesday - On his coach 's show Thursday , Jim Boeheim said his team did not quit Tuesday n . 
morning world , hope gonna be nice for me 	 
C'mon everybody knows the Stone Cold Stunner is a problem ! Lol ( 
Pray for . Very worried as it seems that government is planning a war crime tomorrow against people . We are all ready .	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31  
am I gonna have to blow your phone up tomorrow ? 	 
today was my baby 's birthday ! She turned 22 ! I told her 3 times via fb , text , in person ! SWAGG !	 
About to get some Chinese food -- i had some last night it was 
Okay , so I've been working my way through the box sets since August , but still . eye*	 
Today . I'll find the link for you .	 
Would love us some bp buns this evening . And every other evening . - The Whistler .	 
if you're watching Jersey Shore tonight ! 
Training Day coming on on Saturday 
Today has definitely had a big influence from Craig David Official . ' Can you " Fill me in "?. ha	 
Mount Pleasant 's lingering rough-around-the-edges ambience - Vancouver Sun 
in the studio . Big dhow tomorrow in Greensboro . Check it out ! 
hehe well if you have other questions I'll be happy to answer them  Off to bed now . Night 	 
Some wondering if internet went down after AP released graphic video . I think internet is down to prevent other videos tomorrow !	 
Reuters also reporting text messaging is disrupted throughout country . Vodafone Egypt remains silent ahead of Friday protests 
ok cool the bus will prob be around 7.32 for me then  . you may be of the hock with this thing I got I can't find it anywhere	 
Ah , thursday is done ! On to a Friday !	 
Marines with 5th Battalion , 11th Marine Regiment launch a high mobility artillery rocket system from Forward . 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Soup was good .  Pondering wether or not to call in sick for work tomorrow . Only a 5 hour shift so might just do it . 	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectation	 
Posted a recorded version of the presentation I was going to make at tonight 
Vampire Diaries is back tonight on The CW ! Yummy . Will you be watching ? 
two nights in a row . Probably gonna hate myself tomorrow .	 
all day saturday all day sunday . Gotta love Arizona sometimes . Sometimes	 
Not workin today . Gettin some pulled pork and slaw . And chocolate porter .  
I hate morning call	 
Due to the snow , all Philly schools are closed again tomorrow .	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Also , last night 's dinner with + was amazing ! Three course meal at West Restaurant .	 
I'm bringing you homemade canned goods tonight . Do you want pickled treats or jelly ?	 
What changed since yesterday ? :/	 
Load up the choppers like its Dec . 31st .	 
you going next two days , or was today your only day ?	 
I do believe it 's a sandwich and beer kind of Friday	 
COD Black Ops - Are Older Games Better ? Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 34 look at 
failing bio and math tomorrow , no fucking doubt	 
Payday at last ! This has been the longest month ever . Why can't we have our council tax-free months in Jan Feb ?!	 
Girl , you can thank me in the morning when you wake up feeling hella good . 
it 's like more or less on afternoon flight . So why shd I like bluff myself~	 
Getting ready to head out for a night of food shopping with my BFF . much , much needed .	 
The world today boy I tell you	 
We had Amos Lee on at work today.here 's to hoping that never happens again .	 
and if we have school tomorrow imma be 
Today 's blog post Reflecting on My Own Photographic Path and Passion 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Rugby away trip involving 6 hour coach ride tomorrow . My dvd input will include Weekend at Bernie 's The Notebook . Debating The Tudors .	 
man i am hating tonight -sighs-	 
I've been on a candy rush today .	 
Have you ever had a pussy so good in tight that yu hear that pussy talking at night ?	 
Hulu may rebrand itself as cable-like TV bundle provider Sigh .	 
Daily Mail The Friday Five Sexy football ? Not with these Dutch flops Despite coming through Ajax 's highly-reg . 
Just finished 2nd yoga session with my mom and sister . It was great !	 
if u don't fuck on the 1st nite	 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home fr ." and got Part 1 The Game ! Try it 
Legal informs me I may have tweeted something I shouldn't at some stage . Buggered if I can find it using twitter or google realtime search	 
fuck playing devil may cry 4	 
Would you love to work in the online marketing world ? Join Fluency Media this summer as a Marketing Intern . Apply on MSC by Feb 25 	 
I may need that help my Junior year , I signed up for 4 writing classes , intro to college writing being one .	 
Men lie women lie 's dont -- " Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote been named an starter for the 13th straight season	 
Friday , the weekend , two more days of work , then off for a week ! Woo !	 
You can take them to our show tonight ? hahaha	 
cause it was fun after the 8th time L	 
if time is all i have . i love that song , but if he ever sang to me i'd want him to sing like ur beautiful , or stay the night	 
Murdoch 's iPad newspaper The Daily to launch Feb . 2 
$20 Good toward Food and Drink Purchase for $9 . Click on this like to buys yours today . Only a couple hours . 
I was just at the 3rd largest Wal-Mart in the country !	 
So tomorrow wearing my pinnacles and hyper wheels will let you know what 's up	 
Can't wait to see u tonight !	 
the new products began arriving today . new stuff looks good ! 
New dogs arriving tomorrow night ! 3 more are coming " home " to us !	 
Going to have to lock myself in a darkened room for an hour when I leave the office today just to de-Glee .	 
I don't know how many times I've listened to Love Is On Its Way today . probably like 243445324589 times . I can't help it . :D	 
The sun risin while you moanin	 
let me know blood red light nights or night trips	 
Hoping that can find our way to the clouds tonight . 	 
So , when do u want me tonight ? LOL ! I mean bedtime ?	 
Sunday morning rain is falling . 	 
what am i doing tomorrow ?	 
Critic 's Corner Thursday Stay off drugs with ' Community ' 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
How did the Internet Marketing Academy go today ?	 
I thought you'd love my free show ! Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
Hey Madison Hip-Hop ! Enter the 2011 Madison Area Music Awards , closes Monday at 12am ! Let 's show how huge our scene is 
SO yeah today was my first day of my probably-new job embroidery guy for psychopathic records inc . so many hatchet man hats .	 
Can't wait till February 1st 
1894 Venice - The city is past it 's glory days , and it 's current main industry is already tourism . Won't start sinking until 20th century .	 
what to do tonight .	 
Monday Night Combat time ! Hit me up on Steam . User :[ dc]macrogeek	 
today the trainin was good , but the evolution comin every trainin . God bless all the bboys	 
in , 66 in tomorrow . and U ask WHY I live in ? and to boot !	 
Happy Birthday Brummie Allan , Steve K Others !No offence to ' others'.  OK , it may not come across well put . 
Due to the inclement weather , all School District of Philadelphia Schools will be closed Friday , January 28th .	 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 3333	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to  .	 
Math final tomorrow // :	 
Late night Mini Egg Mousse !	 
Watching marilyn monroe movies in my snuggie after eating chinese food . Good night ? Absolutely .	 
where will you be on feb 1st ?	 
Register for two FREE photography workshops in Millennium Park on Feb 5 via events on our Facebook .	 
Playing Cards Reprise Top rated in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 38 look at 
I hope we dont have class tomorrow so I can sleep in and start enjoying my 3 day weekend	 
such a beautiful evening , such a beautiful night , do you think there 's a meaning in whatever so bright ?	 
God woke you up this morning to see another day ! That 's more than enough to be " Thankful " for .  .	 
once when I no longer blvd in hell/heaven then ppl convinced me ' I was still fine . the 2nd time was the divinity of Jesus .	 
thanks lovely ! I'll text ya tomorrow about it coz it might be worth you joining there too x	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight !	 
My lil sis got her hearing on Monday  
He is new to Twitter , but an old face in the industry . Follow this follow friday 
Lol ! Not going to able to watch the Shore tonight . Bummed ! Maybe if they show a replay .	 
hungry . too lazy to cook . who wants to be my servant for the evening ?	 
Friday nite can't see ms on time ! Keep good mood with singing ultimate wheels	 
yeah from the morning lol	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Raining now , probably snowing tomorrow . Now I'm starting to question . Do I really heart#NY ?	 
Which is the one who adores me cuz I may do the same to u	 
Realest thing I read today said " Fear is the movement from certainty to uncertainty " - Krishnamurty	 
$NFLX Broke out to new highs today on heavy volume - per yesterdays earnings . 	 
Update DC Public Schools will open on 2 hour delay on Friday . DC Gov will open on time	 
Derrick Rose may not play tomar lol	 
appointment for 2 at 8 but apparently they can only make one first . who the hell come so early today T . T	 
omgg , today was an awesome day , it was super funny ! ( :	 
The sit-ups push-ups I did yesterday , left me a present . I got it this morning . Muscle pains .	 
I keep thinking it 's Friday	 
Something I learned today Livejournal is THE place to find Broadway bootlegs , especially of Wicked , Phantom , and Les Miz .	 
i hope that Gaga 's Grammy performance is on itunes after the 13th ! it was last year .	 
March 27th the Celebrity Apprentice . Get a sneak peek at the new season and how you could be part of it with me . 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Jersey Shore tonight !	 
nobody likes u ! wat u on tonight son ?	 
I've got a job interview tomorrow .	 
i know  i get cramps so bad sometimes all i wanna do is cry . They are pretty horrendous today . No meds touched it 	 
May i know your choice mam ?	 
Today I deleted an album from my itunes library . Serious sacrilege - but so is the album/artists .	 
NYC ! Tonight is your last chance to enter to win a pair of tickets to Panic ! At The Disco 's sold out show on Tuesday ! .	 
tomorrow morning if I almost die like I did the other day then ima be mad hahahaha . gotta make jokes . i was almost done for yall 
sounds like it will get especially intense right after Friday prayers tomorrow in Cairo  
i feel da same way i dream bout dem day nd night 	 
Winter Weather Expected to Follow Warm Weekend - Those looking for a little winter weekend getaway may not find a be . 
Set up my Twitter account today	 
Ann Arbor blog Daily Deals for Today 
who wants to do KINGS on Tuesday for my birthday drinks and bowling =]	 
Very " Hot " in the hard rain morning .	 
Did you know the CIAA Tournament is the 2nd largest fan experience in collegiate sports ?	 
I cant wait till Feb 11th :] Or the 9th if my mom suprises me and really did get the preview passes	 
Crimestoppers Car break-ins on Grand Island - Wednesday night , the Sheriff 's Department got calls from a number o . 
Buffalo Bandits visit The Park School - Four members of the Buffalo Bandits worked with 6th and 7th graders at the s . 
Good People of twitter , how are you ? Was too crazy busy today to even ask . Tell me what you are up to .	 
Someone tell me why I need to choose between the and tonight . Still undecided .	 
2011 will be the year of sun-up-to-sun-down surf/beach days . 	 
It 's always Pink Friday hoe face*	 
Me update was stuck in traffic 8 hours yesterday , power still out . Staying in hotel tonight . I am part of the problem .	 
talked on last night 's and just saw you speak German , super ! How r u learning CSS/ Java ? Self-study or class ?	 
Have you got your tickets for the next storytelling night , this Tuesday ? It 's gonna be sweet 
lmao watch that b word . But real talk I went to see today and I gotta 92	 
thanks for spending so much time with us on ustream today . it was amazing 	 
March 26th , please come faster .	 
be better than you were yesterday 3	 
tweet-up at the bus stop tomorrow to go to the warehouse ?	 
Ok got to get my mind right for the game tonight so wit that FUCK and LMAO	 
Why is it still January ? It needs to be May right now .	 
We have a 90 minute delay opening tomorrow	 
Flurries tonight , low 26  .	 
How snoop come out with a 10th album ?	 
Imma tell you tomorrow because I dont want nobody tellin them before I do .	 
next week ? maybe monday ?	 
Vampire Diaries is back on tonight ! So excited !	 
I knew was gonna be mayor 1st time i seen him on TV . people think they have an actual choice . lol .	 
I just want to touch kiss , said i wish that i could be with you tonight , you give me butterflies 3	 
It appears that you may have issues .	 
Please help me and my friend meet on the 4th of march 2011 , birmingham . 
why " he walks the night "?	 
The female may not be with you very much , but her affections are steadfast and you are always on her mind .	 
shit just asking . i was off today . were is da homey lezley	 
An interview Melinda and I did from Davos - - more to come tomorrow .	 
I think I am too . I may or may not have repressed tears three or four times this week .	 
Thursday = University Night ! Bring College IDs  to get hooked up before Midnight ---- GUEST LIST Returns Next Week !	 
" wow this is really my first time in the main place mall lmao sad huh " -- I was up there earlier today .	 
It 's a beautiful morning to run some test in the lab , everyone ! dalam hati*	 
good night my luv 3	 
I feel like slapping a nigga today 	 
I may curl my hair tomorrow .	 
no- I don't think its teething . I think its the shots from yesterday  Teething biscuits just make him happy lol	 
This has basically been the worst night of work ever .	 
Nice day off tomorrow , just dont know what to do with myself 	 
This is night and I must go to school to search my document again before class is in ? OMG ! I forgot it .	 
Th Egyptian National TV was broadcasting cartoons today . 
11 folks already signed up for our March Rev Clinic in Long Beach , looks like it 's going to be another fun and . 
. Just came from practice , which was finally good today . About to eat my spaghetti and fish , take a shower , and then play w/ iTunes . .	 
The School District has cancelled classes for tomorrow , but SLA will open at 10am to attendees . More details to follow .	 
My dreams could b v . interesting ! night 	 
But it 's not drama , it 's just snow . If -you- got a foot of snow today , that 's drama .	 
Amy Winehouse has a nice rack . . . and the afternoon links 
I was aware how it would work in a team game , just never considered how awesome that is for FFA . I see a 2nd chance .	 
I have school tomorrow  , so I won't be there until the Franklin at night . 
the drought ends tomorrow 
slowly on the comeback . I got to come home today so I know my recovery is going to be FAST now !	 
i'll be going downtown tomorrow night . Republic Live is about to see me WERK ! yeeeah !	 
Its my son 's first bday today too . small world  it 's your birthday ? Happy birthday !	 
Dinner was off the hook tonight ! Lentil tacos , and that mushy corn stuff . YUM !	 
Open work out tonight at Dardano 's 8:30 pm . The Introduction to Aerial Arts class is full	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Aye lil kim this bitch really gone do this with her 3rd video , her voice hurts my ears man .	 
sits down the Fri AM to discuss MO . Send us your ?' s for him here 
THIS Thursday if you shop at Chico 's in Emeryville , 10% of your sales will go to directly to Shalom Bayit - PEACE . .	 
Weather looks alright today , can't really tell if its hot sitting inside , but looks warm ! 
Looking forward to work tomorrow . I'm shit at my personal life but I'm pretty damn good at my job .	 
Even Worst , I was there last night .	 
It would be really epic if we have a snow day tomorrow .	 
i can but i be aggy in the morning	 
Open Microphone tonight at 8:37 PM ! Come sign up early and rock out . we already have a piano , guitar and mics !	 
The today are hittin every single concept of mines i swear haha	 
Today 's train is like that Duran Duran song sniffing like crazy	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
why are people saying new haven doesnt have school tomorrow ?	 
dont wanna study for this test . hmmm i should look at the stuff but it wont be that hard maybe ill wait til tomorrow before class . 
Nah Man I suck . May has all the talent .	 
A pretty girl can kiss a guy , a bird can kiss a butterfly . The rising sun can kiss the grass , but u my friend , yes .	 
I did all my work that 's do for the classes tomorrow	 
Is ch 23 notes due tomorrow ?	 
i went this morning 333 i almost got that but then it showed the amount of calories . not okay . hahaha	 
aha so what'd you do today ?	 
I understand . My 9am class this morning was rough and I didn't even stay up for the whole match last night .	 
Just home from Bristol MOTY awards  . 2010 awarded tonight	 
Yo when you and Dyle are here in Feb ill show you some damn good Vegan eats !	 
P.S. There was drama this morning .	 
Non mais la question c'est Est-il beau et de mon age ?	 
SPONGE BOBBLE ! Most responded in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 44 look at 
Friend at telcom co tells me regime might shut down entire Internet if things intense Friday . Possible .	 
Extras - Bill Clinton is coming to UAlbany on March 2 . The former president says his wife , Hillary Clinton , w 
Ok I'm done in the studio for today . Gonna kick back with some milk , oreo 's a film .	 
Thanks Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines  within two ho .	 
Must sleep . Long day tomorrow .	 
you need to send that application and pack tonight . dont forget	 
Great vid Adam Birr i was watching that in computer apps this morning !	 
I dunno , you tell me . By the way , I hope you wear the blue pj 's tonight . I love those .	 
Patiently waiting for the premiere tonight 
Okay so HHS is going to call Monday afternoon . Works better than tomorrow morning . I like to sleep in , lol .	 
we locked your dad in this week for our convocation in august  yall gotta come ! gonna be there too .	 
Thats not assuring . I need one for tomorrow . If I get one I get an extra 20 points on my Spanish test .	 
Just passed 300 fans on Facebook today -- woo hoo ! Thanks to everyone for your support . 
morning lovely sis !	 
i seem to have ended up with someones lighter after the monkey bar tonight - sorry bout that 	 
. thought it may be useful if you feel the urge before then  Just had a quick look and there is one in Kenilworth	 
healthy at the moment ! =D call you tomorrow .	 
Charm city is packed tonight ! Thx for the article ! Gonna be a busy weekend ! 
it 's almost Friday ! Lol	 
" Despite what you may have heard , mastering for vinyl is the easiest type of mastering you can do , as it ." 
so awesome you got all that done today !  go you  are you doing anything to celebrate ?	 
what babies being sold tonight at the auction ? Gml	 
may i help you ?	 
Saw a guy practicing in nurse/doctor scrubs today . brings new meaning to playing golf after work .	 
dont stop , make it pop . DJ blow my speakers up , tonight imma fight till we see the sunlight ( :	 
2nd guess beloved family horse wins races , gets rabies , has to be shot .	 
This is just not my night .	 
Come to Murphy 's Law tonight on 70th between 1st and York or I swear I'll punch a baby unicorn . 	 
Tryna get inside your mind without that night shift	 
i always give credit to a fly/attractive bitch ! i may be many things , but a hater is not one !	 
Sometimes my cat stares at me like I stare at late night religious programming .	 
Landed at OAK , on shuttle to hotel , seems that my bag will arrive tonight instead of tomorrow !	 
i just wanna have fun . its friday  )	 
just thinking how tonite is going to end	 
We didn't buy or sell anything Yesterday , or Today 01/27/2011 .	 
New Post on Lucy in the Sky with Fashion Stradivarius Look Book February 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Freak basket on inbound pass Most popular in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 46 look at 
Night time thoughts are most precious to me . Today I realised that whether you stop or not the world continues to go round ' So stay strong	 
Lol rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I actually got a good sweat in today ! If you know me you know that ain't easy . SMH ! I thought it was easy 4 all fat people to sweat !	 
' Our society has changed - it 's evolution'New airline PC Air 1st Thai airline to hire transsexual flight attendants ht .	 
i think I'm gonna go to McDonald 's tomorrow . its been a long time !	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Made debut in ' 98 . Kobe has been named an starter for the 13th straight season .	 
lmbo not tomorrow tho  	 
Don't forget about this weeks give away ! log onto to enter-a winner will be selected tomorrow evening 	 
Awesome concert last night at my school ! =) 
Freedom , East Burke girls basketball teams face showdowns tonight The offense has been by committee this year , . 
Moment of stillness Watching a glittering little city emerge along the fault line of night and day .	 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 3 '	 
today we learned about reproduction haha dude my teacher was so willing she was like " the sperm has to go into the egg .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
of Beverly Hills reunion tonight . Camille fights back surely will discuss what Kelsey did to her  .	 
Looks like my step-father 's monitor I had been using died today . It was the same make model as mine wa s.I had bought them at the same time .	 
no one is really tweeting tonight !	 
I saw my TopModel chick on campus today ! What a pleasant surprise ! Love ya sweetie ! 	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Punch in the head an coming home to a drugged welsh kid passed out in my bed . Good night ! Haha	 
To-do-list this afternoon Go to bank , mall , then do the laundry afterwards . 3 more days then day off . 
Tonight photo post production . thank you 
Jan 24th . This week 's Mondays finalist is . ! Well done , please contact support to claim yo .	 
My Balls -  Most responded in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 48 look at 
Days may change , Seasons may change , Years may change but my love upon you never changes	 
Sanity may be madness but the maddest of all is to see life as it is and not as it should be . -Don Quixote hope 
Blog post Why counter-offers don't work out - I anticipated that they may be sorry to see me go , and perhaps be a l . 
Pence rules out presidential run , may run for governor  
Still no wages in the bank . I'll buy the train tickets to the EIHL playoffs tomorrow . Can't stay up any longer !	 
Cain is a great cigar it may replace the edge as my everyday smoke	 
Okay , re tonite 's news , that thing lobbing pot over the border was a trebuchet . Catapults r simpler , less powerful . 
Falcons score just a few seconds into their first power play of the night . Bears lead 2-1 . 
cuz I coulda had it in November but half my lessons were cancelled cuz of the snow and im away almost every weekend for	 
Didn't even get to see my boy today for our nine months cuz I had to study for this fucking exam . I hate you , school .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
friday morning with new head spinning .	 
is excited to be playing futsal tonight . missed soccer so much	 
i went to Vegas in December didn't tweet . i didn't tweet NYE and i said a few things when i was in philly last week .	 
was awesome seeing you guys as a tag team tonight , long may it continue ! 
yourself What have I done today to make myself better ?	 
Wow ESPN News - SI . com Jeff Fisher out as coach of Titans ; he was NFL 's longest active tenured coach 	 
someone should drive me to Disneyland right now . i wanna see underoath tonite	 
5 a side football tonight . but the way I was raped , I would gladly of taken the bum battering	 
10 hours of homework and 4 hours of practice . i would like to sleep tonight thank you	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
try n do the IT homework so i can copy from you tomorrow 	 
Monday you can fall apart . tuesday , wednesday break my heart . thursday doesn't even start . It 's friday I'm love !	 
because they wanna ruin kids lifes get ur 1st period teacher to show attendence	 
Meditating on this today Note to self always have a good software archeologist on staff .	 
As an you tell it like it is , and are untouched by the reaction that may result .	 
Home safe from my 9-5 and not feeling to creative tonight ! My back is hurting me so bad that I just going to take . 
new piercing today ?	 
u so chirpy so early in the morning ? Or is it the friday air ?	 
aww she come back tomorrow 	 
that was the last update 3rd !	 
lol well next time u thinkin at night jus remember what said lol	 
Amazon Kindle Singles officially launches Check out Kindle Singles Today HERE . If you want to write and submit . 
today was unreal . march 4th march 4th march 4th march 4th im excited :D goodnight	 
If I had the chance , I would marry you today .	 
I was gonna be the normal southern gentleman tonight but after this workout.I'm feeling myself . half naked here I come lol	 
u may not but some women will . U gotta be selective	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
Tweeting in the dark is bad . Think I've burnt my retina . N'night.	 
58-103 Babes team did good tonight .	 
Rihanna - Only Girl  Most responded in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 50 look at 
For whom it may concern my show is on today at 8 , tune in to hear me say hilariously awkward things and misuse the equipment ! Yay !	 
You were a beast out there today ! Keep it up !	 
is almost morning and I have not slept , I was thinking in his eyes 
Sorry folks ! Brink will NOT be playin Stubb 's tonight . The cards were all against us this time around . Sorry for . 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
I think I'm going to get my hair dyed soon , tomorrow maybe .	 
1 . You are not old . 2 . It depends on how late you slept last night . 	 
As a In your need to feel secure , you may hold many things close to you , almost in a possessive .	 
wow - she looks like she 's kick my butt . pilates this afternoon is more my speed . thanks for the offer though !	 
1st inbetweeners episode is amazing when you go back . " yeap thats a baggage themed insult "	 
8 Louis was born in 24th of December 1991  , in Doncaster . He 's a student at Hall Cross School .	 
yea yea ! lol u wanna go out friday ? lol	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Got a Cr-48 in the mail today ! Total surprise ! 
I hope you are safe . Tamim was ecstatic yesterday .	 
omg so scared bout next monday im gonna be on tv 4 the 1st time in me life wht do i do x	 
I hope so , I think the Egyptian gov is ready to get its hand dirty on Friday	 
Overshooting Bike Ramp FAIL Most discussed in Save-Youtube today update 18:32 51 look at 
u noe , cos all da oda art subjects , da deadline is monday -_-	 
Good point . it 's also the 15th anniversary of this too .	 
Revamped my testimonials page on the blog today ! If you have a blog you should do this for sure ! 
Rachel said that she did notice that the dog , Chica , was heavier than usual yesterday , but she didn't suspect a thing .	 
We took a test today that was soo stupid . when the fuck in life are we going to fold paper and punch random holes in it ? NEVER !)	 
[ 110126 ] JUNSU My favourite singer is directing today ^^ Who is it ? keke Please look forward to the release of my s .	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday . 
How about we talk some time next Thursday afternoon-say noon-ish ? Let 's see how we can help some women find love !	 
where will you be on feb 1st ?	 
What comes on tv tonight ?	 
\n Take Your Fifth Wheel Camper To Roswell , New Mexico\n It may not be spring yet , but spring fe . 
When I owe the bank money , its gone from account last Sunday . When they owe me money and it will take 5 business day .	 
Ok send me a link so I can post it tonight .	 
Diving Poor Knights Island , New Zealand Video of me diving the Poor Knights Islands in New Zealand . December 20 . 
delayed opening tomorrow ? more time to study for gov ? YES	 
Thursday 's won't be the same without Tonight 's was best yet . Come on BBC there 's GOT to be another series !	 
Not just a dating site a place Where you can get laid tonight . 
Good night gorgeous  xxxxxx	 
I can't wait for tomorrow when Titan Insider reports Fisher has been let go	 
Take Your Fifth Wheel Camper To Roswell , New Mexico It may not be spring yet , but spring fever has already hit . 
Beer O'Clock? Pop into the Bridge this Avo/Evening mention this tweet and receive a free BEER ! 28.01 . 11	 
tut tut , ha , kidding . well drink some coffee , and just you remeber when you're having a lazin lie in on tuesday morning think of david	 
it is prefect , I'm just ready for a relaxing evening	 
i'm seeing jimmy eat world a week from tomorrow , I'm freaking out a little	 
You feel like paridise , and I need a vacation tonight PUMP*	 
I didn't even get my morning " i love you " 	 
well said . I'm sick of racism tonight and people saying stuff about jedward . They don't even know them . X	 
Looks like its going to be another snow strom for everyone on the east coast again on Friday night -__- yay I can't wait !	 
Some wondering if internet went down after AP released graphic video . I think internet is down to prevent other .	 
Breakfast by the pool in the sun . Start of a good day	 
today feels so much like a friday	 
prob not ganna work , sorry bro . How about the last weekend in february ?	 
chillin man tryin get this grind in . I'm gonna b out bmore Saturday night	 
ha ha ha ! Tomorrow you start a story in one tweet and we'll keep it moving till it becomes the best story ever told ! X	 
Ready for this game vs ccc tomorrow	 
I was walking home today and my dad seen my and just kept driving . this nigga was laughin when I told him to stop the car	 
right . ^^ good morning .	 
Exactly . The hair says what the face and the hands struggle with . Amazing . And Mahler tomorrow !	 
 We should plan an evening with him and and 
" So this is me swallowing my pride , standing in front of you saying I'm sorry for that night " ;	 
I like Friday .	 
Relaxing , describes my day today . Cool . Except I feel like ditching hw for today and go to sleep	 
aye tryna chill out tomorrow ?	 
Cross the line if you lay awake at night imagining what life would be like if you hadn't lost your love . 
Virgo prefer committed partners rather than one-night stands	 
Thankfully mine hasn't gotten worse  , it 's just been mentally draining . I hope tomorrow is better for you !	 
going to Bama tomorrow fora wedding this weekend . It 's gonna be fun ! Finally tomorrow been waiting all week for it	 
Today International Holocaust Remembrance Day ~ Annual day of Commemoration to honor victims of Nazi Era . LET US NEVER FORGET .	 
US officials expect ' significant violence ' in tomorrow 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking home fr ." and got Part 1 The Game ! Try it 
Just slid thur a stop light and 911 was right there	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
i may not have given you a lot to remember , but please dont forget me .	 
Find out which student has been working with the Secret Service since May . 
how r feeling today ?	 
its gonna be stupid crazy . Yep , just like last and the before and the before that lol	 
Oh I got on in sept	 
A relaxer , trim , deep condition , a weave , four episodes of desperate housewives AND I slept in ? Today was a good day 	 
My pleasure ! What a great class last night ! thank you Lisa Walls Calle for your quilting expertise ! 
Learning a 2nd language like Spanish have countless benefits ! what it takes ? no effort ! no memorization ! 
Food was on point tonight ! 
are you going to the doctor tomorrow ?	 
great to spend time with and today at !	 
boring night i shud of went out !	 
haha  8th grade was really fun ! :D	 
morning too  [ Like it ? ]	 
Ok , why several of my followers at the bar already ? It 's not Friday yet . and why didn't they call me ?!?!	 
Does newark charter have school tomorrow ?	 
I can feel the pain in my heart and brain when i remembered today 's Math . Gah !	 
its homecoming i believe . play mercer saturday at 2 . and they got a couple parties this weekend . check facebook	 
I wonder if my doctor 's scale will be broken tomorrow 	 
yesterday , when we were getting high , you were invited . you would've liked it .	 
Gettin ready for 55 Bar tonight . 1st time rockin there , however heard its a legendary lil pub 
bout 2 get blowed and get rdy for da game lets get dis W tonite 
miss you bish ! Sorry I was in home mode today ! We need to play soon ! Love you !	 
jersey shore tonight yeeeeow	 
Curry for breakfast , like what I said last night . Exotic much ? I'm so tired asdhfksujj	 
I'm getting really , really nervous about what 's going to go down in tomorrow . 
I just took " The Most Dangerous Game ! --- Just another normal night walking ." and got Part 5-charm Bracelet ?! Try it 
thats good to hear what you do today ?	 
WIN a FREE silver pendant for Valentine 's Day . Just follow us and this tweet to enter ! Winner will be selected F .	 
I got a 2 hour delay tomorrow , which is dumb , because it 's supposed to snow again . 
Historic Service on the Isle of Wight to mark Autism Sunday in Sandown on 13th February at 11 a . m .	 
the concords come out in October their saying !	 
Back at my desk working away . Got some friends over for dinner . We are going to cook our asses off tonight .	 
Would be good . Even Civic lunching can be OK but taxi duties start at 130 today . Usually Thu or Fri but depends on rosters .	 
everyone is gonna have school tomorrow so just be guh and deal with it .	 
Did u work today ?	 
Ditto ! But like my friend said -- tomorrow is finally Friday ! Thank goodness .	 
Final game goes to Simmons in the 9th against Cotter 8-7 
lmfao oh dear drunk Ness makes me lol XD how was your night ? 	 
A Gentlemens Club Office - Pool tables , free beer and " casual everyday " dress code may have become the desired and a . 
A Gentlemens Club Office - Pool tables , free beer and " casual everyday " dress code may have become the desired and a . 
A Gentlemens Club Office - Pool tables , free beer and " casual everyday " dress code may have become the desired and a . 
Natures Update Jan 27 , Pumpkin , the beta-carotene king is another super vegetable 
hey can yall dm me yall cell numbers so we can text tonite . i will be at a friends house . hurry cuz i have to go	 
30 minutes until UBOC Event 25 , where we've put bounties on the EIGHT Centerfolds playing tonight !	 
JetBlue expects fare , fee hikes to continue - I need to move to FL so I don't have to fly ! YUK .	 
Deu 2:28 Thou shalt sell me meat for money , that I may eat ; and give me water for money , that I may drink only I will pass through	 
Thirsty Thursday  starts at 9pm ! $ 3.30 domestics all night long !	 
i am going to be a legend for a night , and if you don't assist me then you are a bad person overall 
ISF News Securing cloud computing - Report to be released Tuesday 1 February 2011 
Thanks for the great cappuccino today  cc 
Hey , someone called me from the office this morning . Who was it ? I'm hoping it was MC Paul Barman or .	 
I am waiting to hear if my friend Heather can make it out on Monday night too ! I am out ALL week next week . tired thinking of it !	 
A Gentlemens Club Office - Pool tables , free beer and " casual everyday " dress code may have become the desired and a . 
Motocross fans may get works 
My god . This rules . Not coming into work tomorrow .	 
Is on the sun	 
Bring on the appointments tomorrow ! Business cards , posters , banners going to be made in the next 2 weeks !	 
I'm supposedly supposed to be getting my 2nd tatt tomorrow . Will this move go through or be a loaf ?	 
" Sputnik moment " jumps the shark The rhetoric of competition and American exceptionalism will not help " win tomorrow " 
French exam tomorrow . Wish me luck !	 
Y'know I like awful . Apparently Ebert said it was good though , so brace yourselves . 	 
Can't wait to see ! Showing off my earrings from at the party tonight !	 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 3 ''	 
i bet there will be a new one come April . Huggs to you both	 
loved walking in the snow with my husband , and chatting on the phone with both my children today . gotta love snow days off , shoveling all	 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
I'm going tomorrow . But I fly back on Sunday . It 's a quick trip to work on some things for the band .	 
never cry because they left you , because the next one may just fall for that smile of yours .	 
Today 's photo of the day " Church at Canoncito " 
" If she wants to dance and drink all night then there 's no one that can stop her ." 
lets cruise one tonight ? my treat ( :	 
Happy friday  happy friday everyone !	 
JP where is your head at tonight ? ODU	 
Na its a conversation that came up today like he also talked about what are you gonna do on 12/12/12 ( :	 
Alaska promises release of Palin emails by May 31 
When I hear " Previously on The Vampire Diaries " tonight , I'll start scream and act like a complete retarded LOL	 
I keep thinking about that man from American Idol yesterday whose wife had a brain injury . that so sad	 
getting my glasses tomorrow	 
How does have time to show an old and new video from every artist on the countdown . Can we focus on today 's hits	 
I heard it ends tomorrow . Do you know if thats true ?	 
Getting sleepy . Friends , if I fall asleep now I'm done for the night . I hope you've something interesting for me .	 
:/ i cant ! I have mid terms tomorrow	 
I come alive in the night time .	 
has the preview for RHOC on his website . I watched it yesterday , and its gonna be GOOD !	 
I have to admit that I'm actually excited about Sunday .	 
studying , black out tomorrow 	 
Oh yeah ! New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Vice President also declines to call Egypt 's a dictator , in interview with Jim Lehrer tonight	 
OMG ! Egyptian Gov . orders media blackout tomorrow . Communications , water and electricity will be shut off . Please spread t .	 
$1045 val GIVEAWAY ends FEB 1 w/2 ways to enter 1)this or 2)use official entry tweet 
Come out to the leather n lace affair on feb . 13 618 T st . NW wash , DC 1 block from shaw/howard metro satisfaction gauranteed	 
I had a great day today . No school 	 
4th quarter was brighter for Freescale 
Who 's going to tomorrow the venue ?! If you haven't already get your tickets here -- 
I'm just excited cause one of my expensive items sold on ebay , and now I'm able to go to Canada in March w/ my bf lol	 
Thanks for stopping by today ! 
today some dumb bitch teacher was like " those are not uniform pants " like im not gunna be here for the whole day , shutup .	 
followers thinks that they're the female kevin hart tonight huh ?	 
Yes very good . Brad Burton had to leave early which was a shame . Let me know if you are going to February event .	 
a delayed Morning Glory big Carl 
so many errands ran today . im exhausted	 
Let them eat cake ! January 27 is National Chocolate Cake Day .	 
Every failure from this release have been caused by 3rd-party providers . I think it 's time to re-evaluate our partner relationships .	 
yeah i will next time i see ya ! haha its my fav liner , i have 3 , 4th coming soon XD	 
Heading downtown tonight . Who wants to come ? Shots at my house beforehand .	 
New episodes of Vampire Diaries and Bones tonight ! Can't get better than that ! 	 
King 's Value Rating Low According to a list created by Forbes Magazine , the Sacramento Kings rank 24th among th . 
Double Tapping tomorrow . Jellyman 's Malt Ball Monster first of Home Brewers Gone Wild series " Two in the Bush " Porter	 
Community Why Community is a Must Watch Tonight 
Wales best not lose next Friday but , if they do , hope the other Sun boys will be kind and not mention it too much ! 
Phone keeps having the " I don't want to stay on ." issue . I hope she can last until June . Please pretty iPhone , please !	 
thanks thanks ! good morning ! :D weekend time !	 
I get to sleep in tomorrow . yeah .	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
Tickets were on the slow front today , what a wonderful day 	 
OU men 's tennis to compete in ITA Kick-Off Weekend In the season opener against Wichita State , the 17th-ranked . 
ready for friday ! but not Saturday or Sunday	 
Great lunch w/ the lady today . 
we better not have school tomorrow so i can get my hair done haha	 
fresh haircut tomorrow , gotta get my waves spinning .	 
I got $5 sayin I invite more people to church than u this Sunday ! Lol	 
If I can get a picture of it tomorrow on my phone , will post it on here . You can hike to the top of it .	 
friday night lights beautiful mixtape	 
that 's cool =] I have school on Monday =\ oh well , it shouldn't be too bad =]	 
Oh , it is Friday already in Australia ! It 's still Thursday afternoon here in California .	 
apparently going to a go tournament in St Catherines ON , 20 mins from us border , on Feb 5th . everyone in the area should go , more info later	 
Crunch time ! Final hours for today 's deal 50% off $30 baby sports clothing 
Several articles successfully edited today . Whew . Now it 's time to talk to fabric . 	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
I've done nothing all day hope to continue the trend tomorrow	 
jersey shore all night	 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those hot flashes , night sw . 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those hot flashes , night sw . 
Had a pretty chill day today	 
1st 3 guests to ask has choice of free choice appetizer at 's Falls , or CI Shenanigans . 
mmmm tomorrow is friday !	 
Tennis Preview Rams kick off spring play at home Saturday vs . DU 
I don't know how many times I've listened to Love Is On Its Way today . probably like 243445324589 times . I can't h .	 
Had the weirdest dream last night , wrote a note of it on my phone so I didn't forget it cause I hate forgetting weird dreams	 
Im such a loser . Im never gonna fit into any group . I might as well accept who i am . Nobody . I could die tomorrow and nothing would change .	 
Halfway done with my new book , RADIATE . Working hard to get the rest of it done by February 14th !	 
A girl punched me in the lip today and busted it .	 
[ 110126 ] TAECYEON Our Taeguk Warriors that worked hard , good job ! We watched today 's practice while holding our br .	 
Oh , thats right , we have a meeting tomorrow and you wont be there , right ?	 
Yes ! The episode of silent library with , and is going be on tonight 	 
It 's going to be really awkward December 22nd , 2012 , when everybody wakes up and nothing happened . Just like Y2K .	 
Another Thursday night jazz 
I would but not feelin too good right now good luck tho Come support me at Euclid High tonight 7 
good morning . have great friday everyone ! 	 
good good . I'm glad to see that my emotional turmoil can brighten up your Thursday night !	 
The world won't end in 2012 because Harry 's kids go to Hogwarts on September 1st , 2017 . 
I didnt noticed your photo yesterday ! is he justin long ? I just watched his romantic movie He 's Just Not That Into You and .	 
Dinner with some zetas . Debating on whether to go out tonight or not . I mean I dont have class tomorrow . But I haven't stayed in one night	 
Idol and Jersey Shore tonight !	 
Shannon - thanks for the today ! Hope all is well with you .	 
Well , since it is Friday now .	 
I dedicated this mornings workout to fitness icon Jack LaLanne , who died yesterday at 96 from a pneumonia . God Bles .	 
Not that it really bothers me but I haven't been to work since Tuesday and not a single principal has called to see about me .	 
Having a Baby May Be Worse for Mental Health Than Having an Abortion According to a new study published in the . 
I ate pierogies AND macaroni and cheese for dinner . I don't regret it . Also ? I cannot stop kissing my baby tonight . 	 
tonite shall be epic i ate hella snow so im good to drink	 
i lost like 20 followers today haha .	 
One thing this evening that I tired of was listening to women defend sexism . That bitch on QT Katie Hopkins was remarkably stupid .	 
Have a good night !	 
Excited ! We're going to be reviewing The Mechanic for the first ever podcast on saturday	 
Seeing that the episode of Silent Library is on again tonight made me real happy . 	 
WTF is that looney bin escapee on today ? Talking about buying Joe a car ? One too many knocks to the head as a baby I reckon . smh !	 
Gloomy morning . Where the heck are you big orange glowy thing ?	 
It 's late , I'm tired , it 's cold , it 's also Friday . Good night	 
Friday 's are great for a couple of reasons , but my favorite part about them is that I get to see :]	 
US may allow India to acquire its fifth generation jets The US is open to Indian participation in i . 
thanks for the quote ! Good Evening !	 
US may allow India to acquire its fifth generation jets The US is open to Indian participation in i . 
Graphing calculator arrived in the mail today . Life is complete . 
Picture day at school today . I hope my picture turned out okay . 	 
Gonna start caning my sit up bench again , - so by the time i go on holiday in july my stomach will be flat . 
~~~paid his bills today . 
Tryna convince Ty to come out tonight .	 
Attention yr kids can test better in school if they learn a 2nd language ! give it a try ! FREE DEMO LESSON 
Excellent and very different . Promo is for their debut album which we just wrapped in january . You should love it !	 
right , time to sleep , flying to San Diego in the morning , on a plane , like this guy- 
" No , I sharpie it on every morning " =p 	 
For those out there who are ALSO addicted to NBC 's Thursday night line up Which show is your favorite ?	 
Can NOT wait to see your movie ! Me and all my friends are going to the theatres the night it comes out ! woot woot( :	 
Im still sleepy , Didn't get enough sleep last night	 
Got kids ? The code may work in YOUR favor -- 10 tips for . .	 
waitin for my bro to drop EAST$IDE tonight ! i support !	 
ok I shall check it out a bit later . It 's 0031 here now so I best get sleep I think  night 
Its been a long week , thought it was Friday . Roll on Saturday	 
i swear this 3 luch crap gone drive me insane . not even going to school tomorrow	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Last Chicago show is tonight at Fedora Lounge 9 PM , no cover , half-off apps .	 
On tour with . Thanks to everyone who came out in Tunbridge Wells tonight ! Next stop is Bristol !	 
night falls ~ dreams come ~ smiles rise 
Thanks baby . I wrote you a poem the other night .	 
Getting off xbox . My eyes hurt . Not studying tho cuz my 2 min last night is more than sufficient	 
last day of work . KL bound tonight . wheee ard*	 
There 's not enough time to listen to all good music ! and in one night ? If only we didn't have to sleep .	 
ha I am sure Born This Way will sell more copies then Bionic and the song will so pass Not myself tonight 's records ! 	 
You still goin to the joint tonight ?	 
It 's Thursday - All Night Happy Hour and live jazz . $5 Belvedere cocktails , some tasty wine selections and great food options	 
Our friends had a special visitor to their offices today Jordin Sparks  ! 
all good this end , I've had Jiu Jitsu tonight , so a case of brain saying yay your 18 and body saying no your 35 ha ha 
this may be my all time fav . snap of - nice round today . was fun to watch . 
Enough is enough ! The teenagers WILL help with dinner , my son WILL be skipping practice I WILL get to bed early today !	 
i don't exactly have a ride to school tomorrow . so this could be awkward .	 
" Oh , how I hate you . I hate you so much it gives me energy . I have to get up early in the morning just ." 
Getting ready for night school :/	 
loads ! Haha . No , I'm just on a real downer today 	 
Meet the Greeks tonight at 8 in the Powerhouse ! 
Another day on life 's hard highway ! If that sounds negative,I'm sorry . but to some each day is a struggle . so today I ask Jesus to Bless .	 
What a stressful morning -_- "	 
Havana house thursday $3 miller lights with On the decks guest . ht .	 
The staff put up a Facebook page last night and we have nearly 60 signed up already . That 's scary . in a good way !	 
Another day on life 's hard highway ! If that sounds negative,I'm sorry . but to some each day is a struggle . so today I ask Jesus to Bless .	 
I'm not dancing in the pep rally tomorrow . . .	 
Tomorrow night at Vanguard . Saturday at the Pig N Whistle . Come thru if you're free !	 
im in my dorm cuz we didnt have class today cuz it got cancelled . hehe	 
if you're watching Jersey Shore tonight ! 
I hope Mrs . Sage is back tomorrow . I miss her . 	 
Patti Smith part two tonight at St Giles in the Fields . It was a glorious night . Immeasurably moving .	 
Does anyone know any good Christian churches in the Laurel , MD area with an early service ? I wanna go this Sunday .	 
Children Under Hoof were most fantastic tonight ! More please .	 
Durarara ! DVD Part 1 was released today ! We look forward to hearing your comments ! 	 
How was the Linger + Learn tonight ? Would've loved to be there to access my inner Betty Draper . 	 
That whole " take the road less traveled " thing ? Yeah doesn't really apply in NYC today . 
oh shit today got dance . hais i feel like not going sia no mood , 
1:32 and just getting home . That 's right . On a Thursday . Class tomorrow morning/hmmm today is gonna suck .	 
good morning family  )	 
Theres gonna be a lot of hi-fiving with today .	 
For more of today 's Telescope including Colombians using a pigeon as a drug mule , click -- 
Video Blame Game- had this song on repeat since monday and still seems to make sense as if it was my first . 
Delayed opening tomorrow , yay more sleeeep( text . AG 33	 
Good morning . Happy enjoy u work . FIGHTING !	 
Hope to hear back form college tomorrow 	 
what 's up sis ? u gonna be in the Bible study tonight ?  im good , chillin , and yourself 	 
Made 3 beats before I went to bed yesterday , and they're all placed at the moment . That 's like , efficient .	 
I can't wait for tomorrow when Titan Insider reports Fisher has been let go	 
Trudging along on resume 's cover letter . It 's going alright . Hard to concentrate tonight :/ 
This year 's game will take place at STAPLES Center on February 20th . Catch it live on TNT . 
Egyptian Interior Ministry warns it will take " decisive measures " tomorrow . Serious violence gu .	 
FRIDAY ! along with and bday bash ! .	 
G'morning! Thank you . Have a great day you too !	 
REALLY !? just got mowed over by some big musclebound dude on 5th ave in bk . he yelled COMIN THRU ! n almost pushed me into a snowbank ! 
lol da snow will b gone by sunday sure did ! I doubt I'll make it with all this snow but I'll see what I can do	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
think i have the cold every one seems to have down with . ugh . do i cancel newborn shoot saturday ?	 
Come see what 's cooking on my Tasty Thursday ~ 
you kno that tonight they show the new video of moment 4 life 	 
I went snowshoeing tonight , but kept tripping over my own feet . Kind of like I do in gym class . oh	 
i kinda wish i had my exam in the morning so that i could get the afternoon off , but i don't 	 
G'morning. It 's amazing we've had the sunny days for such a long time . 
I'm not sure when tonight 's episode will appear though , probably in a day or two .	 
only saw them yesterday and he was fine	 
:/ that 's late . Ummm I'll yell you tomorrow what we do .	 
More info on B-Wilson on Lopez Tonight-He 's debuting short film he co-wrote/starred in 
I can't seem to occupy myself today .	 
making brownies for school tomorrow right now because i forgot 
Very well thanks man , super busy ! Tonight has been the first night off of editing in weeks !	 
what happened with the bowling stuff today ?	 
lol they don't make mcgriddles at night though -__-	 
New song tonight !	 
Viagra 60 pills FOR $ 70.64  . Buy today and get a half of order for free . 
I'll be seeing exactly 26 hours from now ! Hey Ben ! Want to do dinner at the Rock Bottom tomorrow ? You'll have to pay , though .	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
Working on an extra big painting today while watching musicals .	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Friday , time to work harder than the rest of the week . Fight for the people , that 's the motto today 
Moving to Vegas on the 4th . Already have a place . Blessings .	 
yay ! power came back around 2pm today , and now finally all caught up with everything ., sorry about dropping off last night	 
Beautiful nap . How am I gonna sleep tonight now ? ) :	 
so excited is coming to my school in March	 
time 02.30 and good morning my love , in there i guess 08.30 =)	 
Gonna be 40 on sunday , yep , i love you too melbourne	 
I can't cause I have class at 8am on Saturday 's	 
Is super excited that I got my jump back ball tickets today !  can't wait !	 
Urgent call to Satellite phone owners in you will be the only connection tomorrow ! 
i'll be in warsaw on friday too .-)maybe See u there	 
i wanna seee tomorrow	 
Another drink or bed ? bearing in mind in the morning . Thankfully watching not playing	 
What 's the coolest thing you saw at today ? We're getting ready to pick our award winners !	 
well you better be ready to swim on Saturday !. that 's what she said	 
Haven't pre ordered the new record yet ? We just put up a new package  today ! Check it out -- 
got my eyes opened WIDE today i've decided there 's no more of this BS .	 
Morning 9am sucks okay .	 
Hell yea . Thanks baby One shot go be dedicated to tonight 	 
have a later flight out on Sunday , would love to get lunch if you've time !	 
Work today was a continuous connive , thrive , drive . joking out the simple joy of just being alive . lol .	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Fuck I have to wait til February 10 for a new one ! Fuck this im going to Santa Ana fucking rich fullerton people are so mean !	 
FMU kicks off Black History Month celebrations A community kick off celebration takes place Tuesday . BY LATOYA . 
Me too ! I hope busses are running . I still wanna go out with my girls tomorrow !	 
What could that look like ? Maybe it looks like local psych nurses doing a Saturday seminar to teach other nurses how to recognize symptoms	 
Jontel Evans made a 3 ? is in business tonight . That 's a sign of the apocalypse .	 
but I'm lonely ! I asked Dylan how he feels about 2nd Chance Saloon .	 
As a you have a certain nonchalance about you , and some may even think you are disinterested in th .	 
Woman from on a Jeopardy tonight :O	 
It hit me about halfway through the funeral service today that he 's really gone . I fell apart .	 
Free family pass to tonight 's show to the first person to bring us the ENTIRE contents of Charlie Sheen 's glovebox . 
Action Tonight ! head west to face 10:30 pm Tip Off ---- 
I guess so ?! They will email to confirm tomorrow . I'll sing and dance when its in black and white lol	 
is the original Rebel Without a Cause . Dbl Feature w/ East of Eden Fri at Aero 
Major controls upgrade today . The game us fun ! Maybe we submit to the appstore tomorrow ? 
Doing the school morning announcements .	 
your cracking me up tonight . Lol	 
did get your msg from last night was sleeping	 
Girl in class says she 's scared to sleep at night with all this tech the government has about her . She needs to sit down and marinate .	 
may all of their response be so swift !	 
Historical Thursday Katzenklavier - As it happens every once in a while here on TIFI , sequential Historical T . htt .	 
object up close may seem different from far away@LMAOTwitpics Well Damn ! 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 33 '	 
studying , black out tomorrow  [ Like it ? ]	 
k save it for me lol . I'll be there in march	 
Gonna start both school works and wait for the first episode of skins 5 to download . long night it is .	 
If you have been affected by flooding join the The Flood Relief Webinar . At 7pm on Friday 4th of February a joint . .	 
- please make my night and follow me , it'll bring the biggest smile to my face .	 
Hoping the sun sticks around Seattle a little longer so I can justify some new sunglasses . Maybe these ? 
Its official I'm enlisted i will be may 31st nd ill be south carolina	 
Bring those parts Mabel Davis session tonight . Possibility that I could take a few actual laps .	 
FAMILY FUN ! This at Danforth - 10:30 - 11:15 am . Scroll down to find out more information 
homework tonight , and all weekend . at least i have a 3 day weekend 	 
bad joke mate . ppl died yesterday to gain their freedom .	 
I just can't believe Jaz put that shit on Twitter . I'm gon dog walk her ass Sunday !	 
lol , i have to really sit down and listen , but Eardrum hit me the 1st time i heard , this one doesn't have that effect	 
love a jam-filled cape town less cubana greenpoint - . work tomorrow .	 
Eating Fatty Foods May Up Your Risk of Depression 
Driving with the sun setting listening to she&him im just a 
Night , honey bunny 3	 
Hey everyone , how are you today ? Let 's talk about sex , come and see me online . x	 
all about pushups today . nothing else .	 
About to watch and and da rest of get this win n tonight ! 
Guess I'll put my clothes up and pack later on tonight . I'm jus chillin ret na tho	 
i need nude pumps ! U kno where some might be ? I plan on goin to this weekend and this will be my 1st time in months !	 
I need to borrow some Sat phone and Sat internet uplink for Egypt - please contact me ASAP for in country deployment . .	 
" Say goodbye to my heart tonight "	 
Ugh , so did I , but there it is . I'm stuck here till tomorrow morning . I'll see you at cocktails tomorrow .	 
lol , people asking about the 1st line . " It doesn't matter if you love him [ a man] , or capital H-I-M [ God ] " .	 
Thank you , but no thank you , first Pink now GaGa , I'm fucking sick of all the Christina rip-off's, good night !	 
Special sneak peek of new page debuting on Sunday . Still working out a few kinks , but still pretty awesome already 
Flashes may be a sign of good health 
As a your genuine tie to the past is strong and it may be something you feel you have to care for .	 
Night paintball event drew 19 teams to battle in over 85 rounds TEAM A.C.E. emerged as winners of the inaugural . 
make your night better you a drink*	 
Approx $550 in books to be purchased tomorrow . for free ! Thankyou grant monies ! I will also buy notebooks , candy more school supplies ! 	 
you missed a good vid on today / )	 
Why you should buy airline tickets at midnight Tuesday - moneyville.ca Blogs via 
Get down tonight cum on everybody-8-	 
i'm not goin to the strip club tonight cuz my rapper boo wouldn't give me a stack of 1's. -- You're damn right !	 
Yesterday I went to the dentist . . _ .!	 
WooHoo ! Fabulous ! Humbled and Thankful to have sold 10 vehicles today .	 
I may start on my taxes tonight , I got almost everything I need 
if Joey abell wins tomorrow night , will you name your next cat ' Minnesota Ice'?	 
Yes ! Go to tvland.com watch them ! Love both those ladies ! I may have to find some time and watch !	 
People are gonna need to be put in place tonight	 
busy day tomorow . busier night	 
at LEAST air Smallville and Supernatural on Saturday night . DONT make us wait another fucking week .	 
something to look forward to tomorrow  I hate snow .	 
. purchase was yesterday for an item that would have paid for half the drawings . i've just sent him a message saying i wouldn't leave .	 
another date tomorrow . 	 
On the other hand , got my first GOOD look in ages at his top jaw . 1st grown-up molar on one side is 2/3 in , the other 1/4 in .	 
LA philharmonic at the barbican tonight . Bliss	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Ears still ringing from a solid , comfortingly loud practice . Really looking forward to the show on Saturday 
gonna watch the vampire diaries tomorrow 	 
Friday . see you then !	 
lol ! No cuz i missed it today so I have to go to the place or maybe ill just wait until my school does a blood drive again	 
Rejoice and love yourself today . Cause baby you were born this way	 
sorry to disappoint but this snow coming is not gonna give us a closing tomorrow .	 
Having a Baby May Be Worse for Mental Health Than Having an Abortion According to a new study published in the . 
Screw you all . I'm wearing heels tomorrow . High , high , heels .	 
Made debut in ' 98 . Kobe has been named an starter for the 13th straight season .	 
Morning peeps . Worked all night , not sure how long I can stay charged today .	 
" Appetizers for the night Chicken satay , potstickers , and sweet and spicy shrimp !" -- sounds really yummy !	 
GOODNIGHT ! rest that great brain of yours , so we can have more Epic Tweets . Night x 	 
Pay day tomorrow , you know what that means ? Bills 	 
lovely to meet you tonight . Am still reeling but what a gig !	 
Tonight 's episode looks pretty intense too . You better get some kleenex ready .	 
leaving for dance soon i cant wait i have so much fun in there . today has been a busy day . and so will tomorrow . but its worth it .	 
Today we continue our verse-by-verse study through the Bible in the Hebrew Scriptures . // Amos Chapter 5 // Need a Bible ? 
monumental excitement building for ' s return to . I may need him to help make donuts .	 
The Milano/SEABONE undersea cable appears to be intact . However the connection appears to have been pulled by TE Data . .	 
's gonna be here on Tuesday I can't even go cause I have to be somewhere . I'm so mad ! I hope he 's at the premiere .	 
so Cody , wish me a happy 14 birthday tomorrow ? ( :	 
I'm starting to plan our Florida trip ! Even though it 's not until March , I'm really excited . Universal studios  
seems to have a bug enter 2/2/2011 = Feb 2nd , Add 2/4/2011 , visual cal says 4th Feb but saves as 2nd April . Bugger to resolve .	 
Sex at work May rules MP offside | Simon Hoggart 's sketch 
Gaga is coming to Toronto at march , I won't be heree	 
Anyone have a link to the version of Endless Art on tonight ? 
y'all going to be in Richmond tomorrow ?	 
monday if we go	 
It 's my ! Bout to get this weekend jumpin . 
Since you been gone , everything has gone wrong . Just hear what i have to say , because today could be the last day .	 
Cant wait till Jersey Shore tonight	 
Just booked poker hall-of-famer on my Final Table show next Tuesday to talk about his huge tournament victory in Australia !	 
for her sexy rain boots yesterday 	 
When I tell you " Criminal Minds " will have you thinking twice about taking the trash out alone at night .	 
Feeling for Egypt . The Internet went down in our office today for about 5 minutes . It sucked .	 
is trending world wide . 6th Gaga TT today 12th in last 7 days . monsters are really steppin it up I'm a monster	 
March is like Connecticut long and in the way .	 
love the pics from today ; all of them . Are we still on for tomorrow at 6am ?	 
he may be taller but you look bigger . 
Night paintball event drew 19 teams to battle in over 85 rounds 
Big plans ahead ! Great meeting today of the Maine Association of Realtors PR committee . Stayed tuned for details ! 
in February what ?	 
Did you correct the typos from this morning ? If so , I'll be happy to read it again 
May not be a bad thing if Coming Home is only instead of . maybe that means theres more people already home ? Wish i was .	 
Aw ! So cute ! Today is hat day ? I wish I had known this .	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
I didn't know I could be this tired after sitting down all day . Whew ! I'll catch up with you all tomorrow .	 
Japan Dec core CPI - 0.4 % on the year after falling 0.5 % previous month	 
Just a reminder that Season 2 starts tonight ! YAY !	 
Okay , I must stop this twittering and get ready for tonight 's Bible study ! Check ya'll later ! takes hands away from keyboard*	 
Wore this while sleeping last night . It was so cold in my room . 
Math exam tomorrow .	 
This means they chose the Player over the coach , may have to go !	 
aw , i think mine said 24th . time to meet some new friends . lol	 
They need to open up a better rugby story in the city . this one on 14th suck eggs !	 
We didn't think of it because we would like to sleep past 6:30 tomorrow morning .  . 	 
at home sick so catching up on greys and or the bachelor that I missed Monday night .	 
BTW happy birthday , can't wait to celebrate tomorrow !	 
Starting off the semester right . 6/6 on a pop quiz today :D	 
the beach sucks here . hawaii 's the place where its got the best beaches . im going there in june 	 
haha xD im one random person i know . but today im really feelin it haha	 
think im bout to take a quick nap or some shit is this monday ! 
Almost forgot today was pay day smh . I thought it was Wednesday	 
I saw the biggest juice head at work today ! I thought he was a trainer but nope , he was a cop lol	 
. In Bio today , all we talked about was people that tried to use Mtn Dew as a douche because they heard it kills sperm .	 
Should be ! a lot of friends supporting friends tonight . Its how our industry should b .	 
Corporate news Thursday - 28 January 2011 The 2010 Nissan Patrol won its fourth Middle East regional award sinc . 
Popularity Reasons of Aluminum - The use of aluminum in today 's world is huge and it not just a story of present tim . 
Westlake Ward 4 meeting will focus on home security Feb . 10 - Sun Star Courier  
we have a date tomorrow . my treat 	 
3 major projects that I have to finish by tonight . Let 's do this ! Morning 	 
GOT MY NEW SHOES .! if u want to see look at them on flickr .! or wait until tomorrow .! 
So by getting new power rankings out today I meant the Dr . would do them tomorrow . Apparently there are other contributors to the site .	 
Found out a few bad things today .	 
It 's Thursday , I'm ready to do something !	 
And tryouts are only tonight right ?	 
Saw 127 Hours today . Pretty good , not as brutal as some have made out ! One goof - putting a watch back on with one free arm ? Hmmm .	 
Please help me and my friend meet on the 4th of march 2011 , birmingham . 
Saw the amazing stage show Mary poppins last night and it was exactly that . Amazing ! Step in time was my favourite , Matt lee is fabx1000	 
going for a run  what a beautiful weather today 	 
" Yesterday , i had an interview at red robin . Im goin places " ok paolo .	 
New York auditions this Friday , Saturday and Sunday . No little snowstorm is going to keep OperaWorks from hearing singers !	 
Lorena Aranda will be our guest choreographer tonight for our weekly Thursday night Community Drop In classes !. 
I look forward to broadening my horizons . And waistline . Night night ;-)	 
ok , now that the iphone for verizon is finally here , i'm thinking i may get the Samsung Fascinate instead - any thoughts or opinions ?	 
As a you have a certain nonchalance about you , and some may even think you are disinterested in th .	 
Craving for my usual breakfast during December . corned beef pandesal and macchiato . I'm hungry .	 
Night folks . Busy day tomorrow , lots to do . X	 
Remember the dreaded beep test from open tryouts ? First team did it today . Ryan Richter came in first , Nakazawa second , Le Toux third .	 
You may block internet but never block will and revolutionary spirit 
is done with his work here in sunny Washington state . I fly home to wintry , cheese-laden Vermont tomorrow . 
Formal recruitment night number 1	 
if you mentally say " wed-nes-day " while writing wednesday	 
lls oh the cool greys sir , friday night lights hahaha	 
What a beautiful day today was with the sun all bright in the sky !	 
I'll be home tomorrow , so maybe we can come visit and play ! I'll have to ask Mike . You down too , ?	 
Guess I'll catch up on Gossip Girl till JS comes on tonight .	 
oh snap ! i also thought it was friday . how are you sir ?	 
Not everyone was online last night , but have a look at the fan video i was sent a link for on the next tweet .	 
I'm entering even though I ate Crust Pizza last night .	 
my aunt 's packing her things going back to Arizona tomorrow . woohoo ! FREEDOM ! i can watch TV now . ahhahaha	 
so cold morning .	 
I see the sun rise in your eyes , your eyes . We got a future full of blue skies , blue skies .	 
yes you do . Like in March . We can scout bands for our new jobs in the music industry .	 
People are fucked . He was outed in a Uganda newspaper weeks ago . Yesterday he was murdered 
Good morning . need ur coffee fix here 's a song from Ashton an Scout .	 
Im taking clothes to wear in vegas but I will for sure buy some clothes there to wear the night of my Birthday .  I want to look SUPPA CUTE	 
TSS ALE:O ne or more device parity protected units still not fully operational . Fri Jan 28 12:33 GMT	 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
going to have to wear heels on Saturday for the first time since fracturing my left ankle and breaking a toe on my right foot	 
yes I will be doing that shortly too with missy . She missed today so want her in bed to get a decent sleep for school .	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Sad cos isn't on in the UK , I'm watching it online tomorrow 	 
wait no school tomorrow ?	 
Comedy night at the Euclid Tavern . be there at 9:00 for the show !	 
on AI some guy was singing " the lion sleeps tonight " and my dad asked " is that from the little mermaid ?" -- haha i love him	 
hmm , okay . ever listening to Bury Tomorrow ?	 
Not far from the reality . check how its done in the Canadian North Wed 's at 8 on History Channel or .	 
E-mail letters , Jan . 27 , 2011 . health insurance and scrap the health care bill . Do they believe 100 percent . 
What to Watch Wednesday The Thursday Edition Awhile ago I referenced wanting to put together a Scared Straight . 
netflix is being such an ass to me tonight boooo	 
Bad vertigo today . MRI tomorrow . I hope it sheds some light on what 's causing all the pain and dizziness .	 
Playing a show in Cambridge , MA at 11:00 PM today at Lizard Lounge 
Morning to alL my friends . 	 
I'm too upset to write an e-mail to the CW right now ! I will do so tomorrow , so It won't be full with profanities ! XD 
and returns delayed ! Good news for Friday 's though .	 
Col . Dudley Clarke named the Commandos , he named the Special Air Service and he may have suggested the name for the Rangers .	 
Can't wait for TMRW night ! " YOU GOT SERVED " is going down . Make sure U get yourself out bring ur crew with U ! 7PM K.	 
Havana House Alhambra tonight special guest . serving up your dri .	 
haha classic date night Fridays ! Should hits some beers though , Laneways ?	 
Gardena  Serra defensive tackle David Maola is having an in-home visit with Arizona State tonight .	 
Carry-along base station cuts costs A technology start-up backed by Google unveiled on Wednesday world 's 
Perfected the art of riding my bike like a scooter home from work tonight after my chain broke . 
Feelin okay ? Headache ? Does it still hurt ? You still gonna swim Saturday ?	 
Went surfing today and saw more sea turtles !	 
I know . I love the newsboys ! I'm going to Winter Jam tomorrow . Did you go to Winter Jam ?	 
Wait , so everything IS supposed to freeze tonight right ?	 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those . 
I've been sober 7 days now.I'm really anticipating tomorrow .	 
I'm still joked out at this text my bro sent me last night	 
I feel tweet jail coming on tonight , please ladies follow 
Sorry but I am tied up after this game . Saturday might work if you will be on for that .	 
Got a call back today for a short ! Yes ! 
I wonder if she'll curl my hair tonight .	 
Update DC Public Schools will open on 2 hour delay on Friday . DC Gov will open on time	 
will US Government stand by let Egyptians be killed tomorrow ? I bet so , but since they're propping up regime they could do something 
my nigger finna get his ass chewed tonight by some and fans . but its all jokes to me tho lmao	 
Jersey shore is in tonight .	 
Here 's the potential scenario for tomorrow police-sponsored thugs will spread chaos , police will forcefully intervene to establish order	 
Morning , have to leave .	 
tomorrow suppose to b 65 degrees sice me .	 
Gaga , for all that buildup , your lyrics kinda blow . Like , I think a 6th grade girl could've written them if she knew the .	 
I will be watching Feb 2 , so will my nana , she 's excited  ! does it have to start late | haha 	 
Lying around , deff not working ! Just found out no school tomorrow , so everyone here is happy .	 
GOP State Lawmakers Push Health Care Law Nullification Idaho lawmakers Wednesday introduced a measure in commit . 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those hot flashes , night sw . 
Snowboarding tomorrow ! and X games for the rest of the weekend	 
hm , what icecream do i eat tonight ?	 
lol hell naw 1st of all they should of sat V.Y. and Fish down and fixed it then fixed da team cause v.y. is a good playr	 
morning too , gud luck n happy friday  RT@agnezmo	 
done for 2011 , now for in march . I need to start saving pennies ASAP !	 
hey lovey ! Sorry I called ur phone so early today . and sorry I missed ur call ! How ya feeling doll ?	 
Good night ! Sweet dreams =)	 
What are you doing for Valentines Day ? I will be playing at Stockbridge 's Gourmet Cheesecakes . Call today for . 
good to see you tonight . Enjoy dubbers x	 
i need you in tonight if I was in the A I would def slide thru .	 
Omg , me too . EXACTLY the same combination . However , on my 3rd glass of wine and 2nd helping of curry . Sobbing is inevitable .	 
is anyone going to school tomorrow ?	 
I woke up this morning , took a deep breath told myself I'm stronger than I was yesterday I'm ready to take on the .	 
Every night I go down to the toilet before I go to bed . When I come back up I HAVE to switch the light on to check my room .	 
Sitting on a sofa on a Sunday afternoon , Going to the candidates debate 	 
School shopping at officeworks last night = $57 altogether for my books and pens  .	 
Went to a faith fair yesterday just for the free cookie . My eternal damnation is now assured . That is , it would be if Hell existed .	 
New York City public schools will be closed today due to bad weather , NYC schools . 	 
Aww no ! Will let you know in morning whether it works for me ! x	 
that Flyboy party saturday !	 
are you going to watch american idol tonight !	 
Too excited tomorrow is jeans day at work , it only comes once a month !	 
bye bye shit multi coloured faded awful hair , tomorrow you will be gone forever more 	 
did a speech today in speech class and ended my speech by saying follow me on twitter . none of them niggas following me .	 
Organic gardening calendar for February - Fort Worth Star Telegram 
Thursday nights= best night of the week . Mom always brings home pizza , no school till Tuesday , and jersey shore . now I sit back and make money	 
What a great Thursday ! Did any of you spend it at our local Salvation Army Thrift store ?	 
Eating Fatty Foods May Up Your Risk of Depression 
Don't Shit Be On Tv Unless It 's Monday Tuesday Or Friday !	 
I wanna wear em but I already know things are gonna get crazy so I may just play it safe .	 
It 's my Friday and I'll play if I want to . Play if I want to . You would play too if it happened to you . With apologies to Lesley Gore .	 
" should of been dead , on a Sunday morning , banging my head , no time for mourning , ain't got no time " is it working ?	 
, we're following you now but we think u should this All-new airs Feb 5th during " Crush Week .	 
Two great shows on tonight , the vampire diaries and jersey shore . yep I'm pretty freakin excited !	 
I learned more about the UofM library journal databases today than I ever wanted to know .	 
Had a great time hanging with you ! Thanks for a fun evening ! = )	 
shout out to for dogging ppl at Camp ! hahahaha remember when i dogged JT that one night lol	 
I'm working on a booth at Exxxotica in July !  I want to meet all my fans !	 
Those who love deeply never grow old ; they may die of old age , but they die young . - Dorothy Canfield Fisher	 
Just saw another thing for The Rite ! Opens tomorrow ! I am so freaking excited about it ! Huge crush on Anthony Hopkins ! Always had one though	 
u already know bro.y'all play tonight	 
Ok so my phone charger dies and I finally get it fixed and now I find out no new supernatural on Friday WTF ! Someone care to tell me why ?	 
sounds like it will get especially intense right after Friday prayers tomorrow in Cairo  
My Breast have augmented[SAT word ]	 
y'all should be at the Knicks game tonight !	 
on the up side it isnt a sun bed , but it is wrong xx	 
Dear , If you would please be so kind to not update me on this evening it would be appreciated . 
Guess What ? 's silent library episode is on at 7:30 EST on tonight ! Check it out 	 
wait , so monday you just get metro cards ?	 
Source within Vodafone they are going to shut all lines within two hours until 5 p.m. on Friday 
1st Food Fight - oh shit ! SE is the best ! 2nd Food Fight- bitch you just fucked us ALL up !	 
Will be glad to see the back of today , been crappy from start to finish . Need sleep and recovery time .	 
So I was suppose to report to work today 0_o ? WTF ?	 
I'm already sick of hearing about that american idol finalist from last night the 5 minute backstory thing on the show was too much already .	 
lol total night ruined jk lmao	 
Say to ! C'mon.we can give up their milkshakes together .	 
Sarah Palin loves the 2nd Amendment because that 's as high as she can count without great effort .	 
Will be live-tweeting American Idol from account for 1st time tonight in an hr . Follow/get at me there .	 
good morning guys !	 
She 's used like 4 Nicki lyrics to insult you . Let that groupie quote songs all night go on about ya business beautiful 	 
long day for me today whew so glad it is over 
Tomorrow night is not looking good for me . I have N O T H I N G to wear 	 
First 20 people to come to tonight will get a limited edition CD . just ask me or get there early !	 
Just got done my homework . I just know were having school tomorrow .	 
Gopher hoops in action tonight vs Northwestern .	 
1st thing lawyers learn is don't trust the plain words of statutes	 
The marriage ring is placed on the 4th finger of your left hand because it 's the only finger that has a vein . htt .	 
I did a lot of meddling today but it was only 12 hours later that I finally remembered the word " meddling ." 
studies shows kids that knows 2nd language test better in school ! give yr kid the gift of a life time ! 
Don't forget ! Coffee Night tonight at RSD Starbucks 5pm  See you there ! Looking forward to it ! FUN FUN !	 
Im gonna be one Hot Toddy tonight . 
" Speak when you are angry and you will make the best speech you will ever regret "  Good Morning and have a great Friday guys	 
Most def . email going on tonight	 
We're so having school tomorrow . Rain , sleet or snow !	 
jersey shore and vampire diaries on tonite yay	 
Thanks for all your calls tonight boys . nurse Kelly is of to sleep  hopefully see you Sat morning for some more . 
Now I need something to do tomorrow	 
Suitcase already pre-packed for my trip HOME tomorrow . 
On the show 1/27/2011 - Justice is served on . the law today ! From Congressman Dennis Kucinich suing over a bad s . 
Join us in Jan and get tix to Playboy Comedy or Brenden Theaters w/access to 
Work didn't even feel like work today . I just played ALL day on my iPhone .	 
West Metro Fire Fighters rescued a boy this afternoon after fell through the ice at Main Reservoir in Lakewood . 
absolutely keen on the pancake party tomorrow . One of the best combinations you can do ya know . 	 
Hey Paul ! Do you know who I would contact at Delux in WEM for a large party on Saturday ? 16 people  we drink !	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
Don't get me started . One of our pastors invoked Tony Campolo today as an authority . A quick Google search revealed he isn't. 
Saturday we play D Town and Catholic and Sunday we play St Paul 's and STM 	 
Kobe Bryant , this year 's leading vote-getter , has been named an starter for the 13th straight season . .	 
Greetings and good night friend 
I hope so , that it'll be on the net anywhere , if SPACE really airs ' Collateral ' on Sunday _ " 
well besides like not sleeping last night , nothing really ( ; hows about yous ?	 
Going to ONWARD tomorrow to hear about their new bio-degradable fabric in more precise  looking forward !	 
is now in a meeting with my fellow class presidents to discuss something about the celebration for our upcoming Lima Week this February .	 
Night class . Bummer or not so much ? We'll see .	 
Zumba tonight !  Exactly 2 hours after my healthy taco dinner . just enough time for digestion .	 
By midday tomorrow lack of sleep will have caught up with me . I won't make in through English .	 
New episode of Vampire Diaries tonight ! Finally . I hear it 's good and damon cries- I thought boys don't cry	 
why ? Em 's 1st verse was the best.Jay 's 1st and 2nd verse Em 's 2nd verse .	 
Don't forget to watch the Season 2 premiere of Archer tonight at 10pm/EST on FX ! " You're in the Danger Zone !" 
sorry bro will shout u tomorrow . I completely forgot	 
I think I'm gonna go computer shopping tomorrow . even though I know in my heart I'll end up with an iPad !	 
on feb 1st at 3pm im gonna be going HAM tryna get mosh tickets for 
good morning ! thought i'd share some photos yesterday . I missed you ! I'm happy to be back on twitter ! how 's everyone ?	 
And acceptance is the answer to all my problems today . BigBook	 
Come and enjoy the half day steam tours tomorrow ! Seats are still available .	 
On the show 1/27/2011 - Justice is served on . the law today ! From Congressman Dennis Kucinich suing over a bad s . 
hey you coming to game night ?	 
Pls note I am so grateful to have a phone to bridge the gap between att disconnecting us , and the new phones arriving next yr , I mean Mon .	 
CMs , Rasmussen weighed in on today 's rate changes 
I think Jenkins was watching Jimmer last night . Raining threes in Richmond right now . 
lmao damn Smh . you know how much I drunk that night ?! Lol	 
catching the end of 106 . 30 minutes on the treadmill huh . Ur look today is amazing . Loving it all . The shoes . OMG !	 
something trumps it on my TiVo so I get the 2nd showing . Learned that last week ! Ah well making tres leches when kids down 1st !	 
you know i can't eat til march stop playin lol	 
Wishing a safe journey to my new lovely friend . May she have a safe journey back home . Hope to see her again so .	 
I forgot about loans . But you may have enough if you got an old enough one . Haha , but the new ones are way nicer .	 
chillin and then some interviews today . we are .	 
ughh its been a long day . ima take my daily beauty sleep  G . evening !	 
no ! I'm a coach - my group is running their 21 miler Saturday on the Austin marathon course . I'm running Houston marathon Sunday	 
I didn't watch last night 's address . If I want to watch a room full of big asses on a Tuesday night , I'll watch the Karda .	 
uggs and leggings tomorrow . 	 
Need more reason to go to the post office tomorrow . Help a girl out  Free goodi .	 
Thanks for the prayers today bout my truck . it worked . it needed just a fuel filter .	 
Just relived that phone call and that night in my head O________O	 
It 's going to be a good night ! - I love my life , I love this record and mi amore vole fe  .	 
Im hoping i dont regret the decision i made today . i see 
I'm super scared  we're gonna die tomorrow	 
Tonight more than 400 people have come out to South Madison Community Festival held at our Urban League building . 
Lunch packed for tomorrow Pita , hummus , sliced chicken breast , blackberries , cucumber carrot sticks . 350 calories . Watch me forget it .	 
After a bad night I pick 1 game and go big . I like the Celtics - 4.5 Portland . GL !	 
rarely show negative emotion , but they may become temperamental if they are bored .	 
Off to see Robyn tonight !	 
My nose is so stuffy today  I feel like sneezing all the time	 
almost made me spit up my food and tried to big boy me today . Faggetier	 
Im totally bricking it bout charing cross today i cant sleep |	 
Make sure you get your tickets for SKRILLEX for Feb . 1 before they sell out ! 
thank god tomorrow 's friday .	 
Well that happens where everyone wants everything . But today has just been boring .	 
go n thur all of my old pics	 
I give up on trending . No offense but we WON'T make it , not enough people are ON . It should be our mission tomorrow though .	 
can u hit it in the morning evening and night ?	 
Yeah , it 's still a thing . Wednesday nights .	 
Tonight recipe contest starting at 8pm followed by the Glenn Tucker Organ Trio at 10pm . 	 
Clearing last few things out of my office . Although I've been shut down since Jan 4 , this feels like the chapter is really ended . Onward .	 
ehm monday  xx	 
Not as bad as the new  Big Ten logo , at least .	 
well don't you have to do stuff in the morning ?	 
i didnt noe hanahan library had all of these carrer , SAT , ACT books . they coulda told us ! 
Today 's most read story , three days running Death threat for a Palin critic by 
hope it snows in the morning .	 
was going to procrastinate today , but she decided to put it off until tomorrow	 
lol . mine usually is , but this year they put it in February and for 2 weeks instead of a week . ;D	 
Ready for feb . 21	 
My mom asked if I wanted to go w her n her old lady friends to Vegas in July . I told her hell fuckin no !	 
Do we have school Monday ?	 
Copyright Info to Keep You from Being Sued copyrighting is pretty much done the moment you create an item today . 
Join Dynamite List today and explode your list . AND your income ! === 
I no money go now that 's y Dec go XDD	 
Mrs . Simmons may I please call u , cause it sounds so nicely ? never ever woulda thought that at 15 I woulda done found .	 
Due to the inclement weather , all School District of Philadelphia Schools will be closed Friday , January 28th .	 
So sick today . I was sick for the past week , but felt great this morning , so I went to sub and it was fun . Now im home and I feel so sick .(	 
gd morning vivek .)	 
to break down the wall that stands between me and _______* 	 
hey girl . dm me your or text me . the barber told me you called the shop today but he wrote the wrong down . 518-209-2356 	 
ur Twitter s/n was on reporter who interviewed us notes-i told her where you guys were sitting abt A&M so she may come find u	 
Fuck guess no skating for me today	 
i get rides to station in the morning looking at some of yah'll on the buses .	 
Today is a month with it on the ground xD Up to my shoulders	 
is heechul really leaving to the military ? i heard that because of his accident injury . he may n`t go ? is that true ?	 
I spilt milk on my phone last night . No use crying over spilled milk tho	 
u two are funny ! did u dance today ? good luck to u !-)	 
said my last goodbyes to the 360 today . It was a good run !	 
Have kinda lost my mojo after cooking all afternoon . Best find it for it 's now time to bake a cake . 
Best experience of the week taking a walk while listening to Animal Collective when the sun is going down . Blues , pinks , purples , oranges .	 
Rapha sample sale starts tomorrow near the Truman Brewery . Worth coming back from the New Forest a little early for 
Got a feeling that Ima just blow dry my hair in the morning .	 
In today 's social experiment , I shall Tweet my most mundane thoughts of the day and see how many people I piss off .	 
, sorry , I forgot I had a dentist appointment today . -__-	 
can't wait to see the fall/winter collection on sunday !	 
It 's friday , i'm in love	 
while yall on the bandwagon for the heat tonight , ima be going with the knicks 	 
Have you heard of ? Now u have no excuse . Come see them this Sat for free and help support . .	 
How is everyone doing today !	 
No shopping for me today , just too much to get ready for our get together plus barely got any sleep last night so slept on .	 
Forgive me , I'm trying to find my calling , I'm calling at night .	 
I hope it snows 2 inches tonight	 
good morning ! its tax day ! lets get it on ! 	 
your birthday is tomorrow ? MY birthday is tomorrow 	 
yeah imma give it to y'all.we comin in 3rd that 's all it is tho . lol fuck appo and st.g 's they can't beat us .	 
Aw damn wish I could stay and see possible Disney pics popping up , but I gotta go sigh , night u guys  xxx have fun 	 
Obama 's ex-aide back on Chicago mayoral ballot With early voting set to begin Monday in the February 22 primary . 
seen willow smith " whip my hair ' video today . it was so cute . and she got style and her own swagg . lol	 
Should have a link on a piece I've done on clubs relocating to new stadiums in the morning . Squad rotation one coming soon , too . Bed now 	 
how may I help you ?	 
See you all tomorrow	 
Who 's going to tomorrow the venue ?! If you haven't already get your tickets here -- .	 
I wonder how made it out today without her favorite intern .	 
yea today just wasnt it for me . whatever , homework time	 
Officially going to with my mom ! Tickets go out Friday ! Yes I luv !	 
I hope you all know i have school tomorrow . It 's 12 33 . I'm listening to classical-type music . Ugh .	 
Is it worth it ? Starting Feb 1st .	 
Who goin to queens tomorrow night	 
sounds like it will get especially intense right after Friday prayers tomorrow in Cairo  
a is going to take place tomorrow in Egypt . Internet is off ,  .	 
Jersey Shore tonight ! Whoop whoop !	 
a very good early morning to you Sasha !	 
i am going to be a legend for a night , and if you don't assist me then you are a bad person overall 
. this broad rappin bout shit from yesterday .	 
Oh ! mentioned in the Strib today c _Yyc aULPQL7PQLanchO7DiUr	 
if you're watching Jersey Shore tonight ! 
by Its only thursday but the feed me tweet me follow me home linky is STILL open ! come find some n .	 
Just ate my last piece of food for 2011 new diet starts tomorrow it polo .	 
I hope yu come next Friday Be unique and say yes	 
Thanks Kofi ! Please tune in for a new Parks and Rec tonight at 930 on NBC . It is very entertaining .	 
Lmao rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
don't. Like he 's sweet . He may have moments , but he 's deff sweet	 
he may as well concern himself with his shadow on the wall	 
no school tomorrow =(	 
I had a nice sleep last night . Thanks .	 
one question if I may , what was or is the biggest interview to date that you have conducted ?	 
excited for tomorrow( :	 
getting my new shoes today ;D	 
i been change from since dec . and only now	 
Sunshine Coast vignette shot at Noosa on Tuesday . 
- meatball subs tonight ! Good now . bad later .	 
YES ! The Vampire Diaries comes back on tonight !	 
Going asleep . Don't know whether I'm in or not tomorrow . Mother said doctors but not sure :/	 
we can go Saturday long as they ain't baby crawfish I don't have time 2 play I wanna eat . lol	 
And now I am off to bed and i'll attempt to sort out the other essays in I.T. or at lunch or in English tomorrow	 
Yao Ming is a starter in the All-Star game ?!? C'mon lets get rid of  fan voting .	 
Well done on this evening hon . ;-) x	 
Each piece of artwork says something different to each person who may look at it	 
Nobody can stay at my house tonight unless u want to hear me 
I am dumb excited about eating dinner tonight . Teriyaki chicken , veggie fried rice and sauteed kale 	 
As a your genuine tie to the past is strong and it may be something you feel you have to care for .	 
New Supernatural episode postponed until February 4 
and if we have school tomorrow imma be 
Why are the ' Skins finished NFC East 4th place , under Dallas , but ALSO have the 10th draft pick . AFTER Dallas . .	 
Time for bed ! too tired and too cold to sit here a moment longer ! night folks , sleep well 	 
until tomorrow my love night night , love you more than life it 's self xxx	 
so what if im sitting in my office taking photos of my new hair ? its friday ok give me a break !	 
cool b u kno me I had 2 get on squad but I sat out dis year but nxt year google me im out chea	 
thanks so much for the about my gig tonight at The Rainbow . hope you guys can make it out !	 
Hooray - so it will be sunny again ? I'm enjoying the coolness of the rain today just not the wetness !	 
Margaritas and Mexican . I need to workout . Terribly ! Gonna lose 5-10 before my 24th bday . It will be done !	 
Im going to see him on the 5th of March cant wait ! honestly know all of his jokes off by heart ! lol xxxx	 
My husband made dinner again  so I should go eat some yumminess . Be back in a while .	 
i mailed off your v-day card today ashlee	 
The Republic of Ilios declared war on The United Kingdom of Helena .Thu Feb 12 , 2980 . War will start immediately . 
HAHA okay it 's yours ! I'll give it to you tomorrow !	 
Hopefully , tomorrow is better .	 
I think somewhere along the line today I was deprived of oxygen . 
Great social media class today . Learned alot and more tomorrow.It 's like drinking from a firehose but in the end it will be worth it .	 
Today 's Citizen Engagement Panel . Video coming soon 
Man I wanna go to the soccer game tomorrow :/	 
No matter how hard the times may seem , Dont give up on our plans , Don't give up on our dreams . Cause were almost there , Just one more step !	 
Hello most favorite part of every Tuesday and Thursday DX	 
I'm driving the long-term 5.0 for the first time tonight . Will I like it as much as the Challenger ?	 
Tonight 's is on . So tune in 8pm to watch ur  . ( Bosh out w .	 
sounds like it will get especially intense right after Friday prayers tomorrow in Cairo  
Demonstration in front of the Egyptian Consulate in LA this Saturday 
how are you doing today ?!? 	 
no . ticketmaster was sold out the day it went on sale ! May be can help getting'em 	 
; ii knw ii knw ill have my new phone by Sat . ii ordered ah new one monday =]	 
tigerheat tonight anyone ?	 
take medicine or something ! Well that stinks . Btw I had to walk by myself to 7th and I felt kinda lost lmao . So come back !	 
morning all . get luck today . n enjoyed .	 
I really dont want to go to work tomorrow .	 
This afternoon , we'll give you a sneek peek 
Just got my to support . In theaters February 11 . Show your support 
Bay of fundy ! 7th new wonder of the world ? Highest tides in the world . Wow !	 
Diaries , Jersey Shore Scared Beyond Straight . Looks like i'm booked for the night .	 
I saw u on maury yesterday . I'm mad u didn't win !	 
from sources in at least one mobile provider confirms receiving orders to cut off service soon , blackout may last till friday .	 
Update What 's to stop corrupt 3rd world diplomats carrying drugs into 1st world countries in their luggage ? ? 
Entertainment Tonight American idol after . 	 
tired from last night . at least work is over and I get to rest .	 
Like I was saying about needing to move to chesapeake . Its my 3rd time driving there from virginia beach today	 
please spread gasoline is being poured on cars in downtown cairo near by policemen , to blame tomorrow fires o .	 
Working hard to get ahead for 2011 season , jimi gets a total rebuild and the wizard gets a vegas setup today .	 
has absolutely no idea what our physics test is on tomorrow	 
I feel like I got one earlier , too . is getting a sunburn . 
U are right ! Lol u should've just said listening party Feb 26th same place as this is the remix see u there	 
Not really.I'm gonna try to eat pasta tonight lol .	 
Sorry for spamming a bit tonight !	 
So if died yesterday . Then why him saying R.I.P . Is he gonna see it or ?	 
Retro board game night at Orlando History Center Friday night 7pm - midnight . Details on our calendar .	 
Headed to the studio . 2 new singles will b dropped tonite	 
friday winding down tune 
Tomorrow when the war began comes out in the UK on April 15 .	 
After Monday and Tuesday even the Calender says , riday . 
Ugh was supposed to move into the new apartment today but they screwed us over already ! Better be getting a discount tomorrow !	 
2nd best team in the league . and conference leading Boston Celtics get ZERO all-star starters ! You all know how to fuel the fire !	 
May go to the rec tonight	 
Dad , today was horrible . This is whole week is gonna be hell . Come home . I can't take it . I'm sick and I have a migraine . :, (	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
is my hero . seriously made my day watching today .	 
Yeah , I may be a bit reckless sometimes , but haven't been suicidal for a fairly long time	 
Physics for financial markets When regulating financial markets , physics may help . As a result of the financial . 
I wanna go to wa tomorrow	 
hey , here is our new logo and the title for our upcoming collaboration show at Opera Gallery NY 10th March 
Haha my hair !  Our friends had a special visitor 2 their offices today ! .	 
bedtime , night all x	 
Super Mum is bringing dinner to us tonight ! She is the BEST !	 
I think I may be losing my marbles a bit . 	 
I kno Feb 15 better be a better be trending everyone better make sold all out of the stores 	 
yu off mountain lOl Handel 's 3 
Off to bed now . See you in the morning . Really , really late in the morning . 
Jersey Shore is coming on tonight ! And I need help finishing up dis turbo tax thing . It is sayin something about pay now	 
Today I used the word FOXY in Scrabble . I am ashamed .	 
its retarded like hello you've known about this since December such a complete and utter piece of crap !	 
Thanks for stopping by today ! 
As a you may think that there is no one out there that could possibly live up to your expectations .	 
My ARC came yesterday . Hope to start it this weekend .	 
There is still stuff to be added . Come tomorrow it should have a banner in there .	 
Reuters reports Nelson Mandela is recovering from a collapsed lung and could be released from hospital tomorrow	 
Even Worst , I was there last night . lol smh for what ?	 
New post Veterans Today Applauds Senator Murray Selection 
Gudmorning@tracyabad  how 's your morning ? 	 
Dell Defendant in Another Gender Discrimination Claim - A lawsuit filed in December by an Austin , Texas woman is the . 
Some wondering if internet went down after AP released graphic video . I think internet is down to prevent other .	 
But the barista girl commented on my TSOYA shirt , saying that someone else had one on yesterday . , cute barista .	 
because friday , i always have tons of works to do and to complete . teehee . btw , morning to u too . 	 
Niggas today is lame as fuck compared to this original real hip hop music .	 
ok I promise ! Tomorrow what time ? 7 ?	 
USA TODAY Tech - LinkedIn looks to link up with investors with IPO 
w/women from other churches tonite praying for the conf in April ! WOW !	 
Good morning . It 's Friday again . 	 
RL was awesome . Sat next to the lead singer from Lincoln park ! Aka my favorite band back in the day !	 
hey babe I already got the email they just shipped your other hat today	 
26-year-old Boise man arrested early Thursday for his fourth DUI . 
stupid kicking me off the streetcar cause my transfers from this morning	 
Now seems the sighting of an elderly man with a dog that looks like Pathos may be true - hopefully know more on Friday .	 
poor advert guy . denied saturday sex by his own wife on national tv . including MY family . :/	 
I FUCKIN hate flukes bro . Thee ultimate worst . geez had one today .	 
thank god tomorrow 's friday .	 
January is almost over ! You only have a few days left for this month 's VIP special of FREE " Grub in a Glass " Garlic Fries with purchase !	 
Flashes may be a sign of good health January 27 , 2011  -- Some good news about those hot flashes , night sw . 
TODAY'S TIP working on 2010 performance reviews ? Pull old emails w/ quotes from colleagues on your performance c .	 
I'm getting my car back tomorrow ,,, nd going to the DMV Monday ,,, OH YES ! 	 
Congratulations to RFDS fundraiser June Files who was awarded an OAM on Australia Day . Thanks for your support June ! 
As a you have a certain nonchalance about you , and some may even think you are disinterested in th .	 
Capital One Announces Quarterly Dividend  today an . 
" Time sets the stage ; fate writes the script ; but only we may choose our character ." - Liam Thomas Ryder	 
Hi , just saw this . had left for work . Yes , coming Saturday . Stopping in Rehoboth to do some returns for Sally .	 
Tonite 's laminate , as u can see booked this one 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
come out to tonight it gonna b epic !	 
i heart friday ! 3	 
Hope you enjoy it ! Can hardly wait to read chapter 10 of tonight !	 
Dying my hair something exciting tonight ! ~pics to come~	 
rise and grind to all the strippers getting ready for work tonite	 
You're better than any rainbow , you're brighter than the sun . You look like my first day of summer when my spring is on the run .	 
1 . I'm extremely jealous 2 . Umayyad that they're gonna cancel midterms you already sat through the hell of world history .	 
ok that you .! cuz i didnt wanna be the only one to show up at work tomorrow	 
let 's try to get over 2000 followers tonight . follow ! lets do it folks !	 
lol , this guy . movie night every night .	 
then the 2nd in NYC and the the 8th in LA . !	 
decided to give up on apush , this weekend has been way too long , thank god tomorrows friday 
Saw some boobs during the show tonight . Makes me feel used	 
son I dont have no classes tomorrow	 
trying again hopefully I'll be lucky and win or I may cry 
Love you all Echelon . See you guys in Brazil on March 3 
lol ill be 34 in march	 
After the photo shoot today , I got out and walked around the city for a bit . Kind of a short walk  , but refreshing !	 
yesterday we had it up on the phone . today it was just BLAH .	 
sounds like it will get especially intense right after Friday prayers tomorrow in Cairo  
Tomorrow 's ball game is dedicated to one of our faculty members who left us far too soon . RIP Ed . We play Daytona State College 2pm .	 
Today must have been movie day on campus	 
good evening :D finally i get to do stuff what i wanted to do \m/ 
There 's always tomorrow .	 
Selena was wearing Justin 's sweater at LAX on Saturday if you said AWH 	 
Thursday 's recipe A heavenly delicious paprika soup with ajvar relish , goat cheese and avocado toast . 
ummm i just noticed ' s twitter avi has that firework from her booby like ' s on her firework vid . Lady had it 1st	 
wow the 2nd half of today in the EPC truck has been brutal . not smooth at all , rough riding .	 
it 's 1.30 am here in sweden . I have school tomorrow . Please reply me so i can fall a sleep with a  on my face ! 33 ''	 
. you should stay the night with me .	 
I wouldnt mind going to school tomorrow .	 
Time to pre-game for tomorrow 's episode that features Qui-Gon and Shmi . To watch the Phantom Menace DVD !	 
Last Snowy morning of the 
glad you agree . Good Evening !	 
News of the day for January 27 , 1979 - Nelson Rockefeller , Tehran , The Pope and a few million people in between . 
meeting of the mammals today ?	 
thank god tomorrow 's friday .	 
where were you today ?!	 
I  my cable guy Austin , ' like in Austin , Texas ' and the client 's landlord had potential today . Sorry I went astray	 
I'm so unmotivated today it took me three hours to tweet this . 
yes but omg i snapped on swanny so hard . hes SO gay tonight .	 
January is almost over ! You only have a few days left for this month 's VIP special of FREE " Grub in a Glass " Garlic Fries with purchase !	 
Holistic Why My New Morning Routine Includes Skin Brushing 
Chelsea on E ! News tonight ! They talked about her new series on NBC 	 
RL at my writing group . will be on for a bit and also during the break . its only 2 hours unlike my wed night class that 's 3	 
Someone in my history class referred to Mother Teresa as Mexican-American today and everyone nodded in agreement 
true , but tell me how many 9th picks in the last 10 years that are currently doin anything cuz I can't think of a single one	 
jersey shore today ( ;	 
Off to Seattle tomorrow for some R&R Woohoo	 
no buses running tomorrow lol . so my grandma said it should be cancelled plus they said it on the radio all schools closed	 
thank god tomorrow 's friday .	 
night night twitter . XXXXX	 
sounds fun . who knows , you may see me there . ;-)	 
Raining now , probably snowing tomorrow . Now I'm wondering if I still heart#newyork ?	 
Club mansion tonight ! Huge party , free bottle to every 7 people that come ! Don't be scared to try some thing new ppl , arena is lame anyway	 
so , all my tweets from today were tokio hotel related . WeLoveTokioHotel	 
It was nice meeting / seeing everyone at tonight in London	 
No snow tonight . but disappoints are a part of life.isn't it ?	 
going to work out with my sis  so ready for friday !)	 
i've already cum 3 times today . i'm spent . i need some juice to make more manjuice for the weekend .	 
sleep all day party all night - sean kingston	 
I was working the show tonight had lot of folk asking who you were - think you've got a lot of new fans !	 
It 's a cold Friday morning .	 
All ages and skill levels are welcome at our weekly chess workshop at Eastmont Branch on Saturday , 12-2 
Branstad Focuses on Cutting Taxes for Small Businesses Slash spending while reducing taxes . Thursday Governor Te . 
I'm going insane . I don't care what the doctor says , I'm going to school tomorrow .	 
the wild turkey 101 is certainly needed today 
Wish I could be there to make his night better .	 
Apparently we are going for Chinese food for supper tonight as an early bd gift to me . Interesting choice since I'm allergic to rice .	 
i got u . did u get the name i sent it yesterday ?	 
Sorry I missed the Tweet Up last night , boo . I was having cosmetic surgery .	 
I'm having a contest ! I am due with baby in March . If you can guess the baby 's birthdate and time you will win . 
The Simoun DVD Box Set will go on sale in Japan on Jan . 28th	 
thank god tomorrow 's friday .	 
Buy Bark-n-Beer tickets online ' til 5pm Fri get a free raffle ticket goodie bag ! 
Workshop Roman Empire Promotion for Authors starts Jan 31 via Hey friends , can I get a on this ? thx	 
soccer startin next weekend till like march then I hav more startin April again	 
Who wants to go Out to Eat on Saturday .? lol	 
I enjoyed the Hell Night last time , I'd go again .	 
the show was awesome tonight , and I looks like your dads still got it !	 
NYC ! Tonight is your last chance to enter to win a pair of tickets to Panic ! At The Disco 's sold out show on Tuesday ! .	 
Yeah you think its funny now , after tomorrow night not a damn things gonna be funny	 
from sources in at least one mobile provider confirms receiving orders to cut off service soon , blackout may last till friday .	 
Nebraska 's Oct 8 game against Ohio State , the first Big Ten game at Memorial Stadium , will also be NU 's homecoming . .	 
Spring elections are around the corner , come get informed about the qualifications and roles of your elected officials . To .	 
i dont even feel like eating tonight	 
Enjoy Coffee in all variations ! You too ? Check out these great ideas and recipes for coffee drinks for lounging tonite 
U can't control what others think of U . But U can control U if U can sleep at night , that 's what matters .	 
Ultrasound booked for the 21st !	 
I think ima do tonight	 
morning . u have a wonderful and inspiring day too !	 
Your vibe today is just ignorance .	 
As a with your active lifestyle , one may think that you have no time for a relationship .	 
Hi all . My Account and Recharges may be down for some customers . We'll let you know when these services are back up .	 
Interpol tonight at the orpheum	 
