I am no stranger to controversy and I am OK with that. I am fearless in the face of what I believe.
Beach, sunshine, soup, iced coffee, a good book, wild flowers; I cannot find a reason not to smile.
The importance of naps cannot be overestimated.
Going home now so I can work on something that is not related to work. 
Failures can sometimes taste extremely sweet. 
This week I've been getting more done being sick at home than healthy in the office, a little uneasy about this.
For once everybody else in the company is as productive as I am in the morning, which is not at all.
had a decent sleep. I'm now nice and refreshed, both physically and mentally.
My spring pollen allergy kicked in yesterday. Hopefully it won't last long this year.
Couldn't make myself to gym this morning. Bringing gym stuff to office to see if I can work out after work.
Peace of life - don't open your laptop unless it's absolute necessary.
Hard constraint facing to you, your mood swings and you are down at the bottom. However, after the initial shock has passed, every direction from there goes upwards. Challenges now become opportunities.
A store manager's job is not to oversee millions of customer transactions a week, but one transaction millions of times a week.
You never know what is going on in people's lives when you serve them.. For all you know, it could be someone's last day on earth.
It was still at 32F degree, but looking up into the sky, I found all the winter constellations are gone and the ones for spring are coming up. I certainly feel that spring is almost there. It is in the same way people tell the season thousands years ago.
Let's put my words in a bottle and release it onto the Hudson River. Let it go into the Atlantic Ocean, travel around the world and let's hope it comes back eventually. Call this a salmon effect as it is what salmon does. You can call it an eel effect in theory, but that doesn't sound too good to me.
This shit kills, check it out.
For the record, I refuse to call my guitar an axe. For the record.
The other day I had this realization that lots of people feel roughly the same horror I do when imagining a possible Romney presidency when they contemplate another Obama term. I wish there was a way for neither group to feel said horror, but in the end I have to admit I'd much much rather it be they than I.
Holy crap last night was one of the most mind-blowing concerts I've seen in years. BANGLADEAFY! and Dub Trio were absolutely off the charts. THIS is why I live in New York.
Nothing at all against the Irish, but the celebration of St. Patrick's Day has to be about the worst thing ever.
Does this seem like the best idea ever or what?
I feel that, to the extent that I have moral responsibility toward other humans, I have that much moral responsibility toward any conscious being regardless of species.
A small step, but a step nonetheless. 
18 days. 5500 miles. 16 concerts. Braving a snowstorm at 4am. Many many new friends. So much fun and beauty in such a short time. Fantastic though to be home in my warm apartment with my kitties.
Hey man I'm glad the tour is going so well I know it means a lot to you. I will be trying to get to a show soon.
I guess I overestimated how much time I'd have for blogging about the tour. I'm having an unreal awesome time though. About to head to Now That's Class in Cleveland for what will assuredly be yet another awesome show.
It's funny how being on the road with hardly any internet for a week makes one realize just how unnecessary all those refresh hits to the news web pages that make up so much of one's daily routine really are.
I have a suspicion, Eric, that you revel in competing with yourself to come up with better and better ways to look ridiculous.
Someone's giving me the tix... but I'm pretty excited to check it out. It'll even be my first time ever to Madison Square Garden.
woke up last night to my cat barfing on me.
Just wanted you to know things are complicated, for sure, but they aren't finished yet. I can't wait to see you in January as well.
Museum exploring is more physically demanding than hiking or snowboarding on mountains. And there are 15 museums here.
Finally, Instagram has come to Android. My virgin work - 'The Empire Building in Night Mist'. not great, but my current view after downloading the app.
Are you kidding me?
did two things for the first time in my life today: driving on snow and powder snowboarding. The time was well spent. I am going to finish a bit work and make the day even better.
The moon breaking clouds.
Spring break starts by carrying snowboard, climbing, photograph equipment and laptop to airport by trains.
People start to choose aisle seats over window seats when they get old.
All dead. What a switch from sexual song to sad love song.
had lunch under the sunshine, by the riverside at South Street Seaport. Feel happy.
It's been a long time! Great to hear from you! How are you? If you're still in the city, Seth and Joanne and I would love to see you! We've been fencing at Coles once a week to stay in shape, and we'd love if you'd join us! 

